1) Overview

This task requires the annotators to give their judgements on whether a tweet is offensive or not. Please note that the data contains offensive or sensitive content, including profanity and racial slurs.

Steps
There are 3 steps to complete this task -

In the first step, the annotators mark the tweet as being offensive or not offensive.
If the tweet is offensive then the annotators need to tell if the offense is targeted towards somebody or something or it is not targeted.
If the offense is targeted then the annotators also need to tell who it is targeted against.

Rules & Tips
Please rate the tweet according to whether it is offensive generally or to the target, not whether you are personally offended by it.

Sub-task A: Offensive or not

In this sub-task we are interested in the identification of offensive posts and posts containing any form of (untargeted) profanity. In this sub-task there are 2 categories in which the tweet could be classified -

Not Offensive - This post does not contain offense or profanity.  Non-offensive posts do not include any form of offense or profanity.
Offensive - This post contains offensive language or a targeted (veiled or direct) offense.  In our annotation, we label a post as offensive if it  contains any form of non-acceptable language (profanity) or a targeted offense which can be veiled or direct. To sum up this category includes insults, threats, and posts containing profane language and swear words.
Sub-task B: Offense types

In this sub-task we are interested in categorizing offenses. Only posts containing offenses are included in sub-task B. In this sub-task, annotators need to label from one of the following categories -

Targeted Insult - A post containing an insult or a threat to an individual, group, or others;
Untargeted - A post containing non-targeted profanity and swearing. 
Posts containing general profanity are not targeted but they contain non-acceptable language. On the other hand, insults and threats are targeted at an individual or group.

Sub-task C: Offense target

Finally, in sub-task C we are interested in the target of offenses. Only posts which are either insults or threats are included in this sub-task. The three categories included in sub-task C are the following:

Individual - The target of the offensive post is an individual: a famous person, named individual or an unnamed person interacting in the conversation.
Group - The target of the offensive post is a group of people considered as a unity due to the same ethnicity, gender or sexual orientation, political affiliation, religious belief, or something else.
Other – The target of the offensive post does not belong to any of the previous two categories (e.g. an organization, a situation, an event, or an issue).

All possible label combinations across all the sub-tasks are as below:

Not offensive
Offensive, Untargeted
Offensive, Targeted Insult, (Individual | Group | Other)

2) Examples

Sub-task A: Offensive language identification

Some of the examples include:

@thecomeback @JABItalia Fuck @APrecourt - Offensive
Hey @LIRR , you are disgusting. Offensive
A true American literary icon. #PhilipRoth will be missed. - Not offensive

Sub-task B: Automatic categorization of offense types

Some of the examples include:

@thecomeback @JABItalia Fuck @APrecourt - Offensive Untargeted
I mean I'm dating to get fucking attention - Offensive Untargeted
Hey @LIRR , you are disgusting. Offensive, Targeted Insult
@BreFields1 @jonesebonee18 fuck you lol - Offensive, Targeted Insult
@karlsantix You are a complete knob! It's ppl like you who are messing up this country - Offensive, Targeted Insult
If I pull up to yo crib and you offer me cockroach milk you getting yo ass beaten - Offensive, Targeted Insult
@Top_Sergeant Assuming liberals are unarmed would be a grave mistake by the deplorables. - Offensive, Targeted Insult

Sub-task C: Offense target identification

Some of the examples include:

Hey @LIRR , you are disgusting. - Offensive, Targeted Insult, Other
@BreFields1 @jonesebonee18 fuck you lol - Offensive, Targeted Insult, Individual
@karlsantix You are a complete knob! It's ppl like you who are messing up this country - Offensive, Targeted Insult, Individual
If I pull up to yo crib and you offer me cockroach milk you getting yo ass beaten - Offensive, Targeted Threat, Individual
@Top_Sergeant Assuming liberals are unarmed would be a grave mistake by the deplorables. - Offensive, Targeted Insult, Group