Keyword Bilayered ribbons Magnetic anisotropy Magneto-optical Kerr effect Vibrating sample magnetometer Magnetic sensors 1 Introduction The technologies , materials , and constructions of various types of sensor elements are still on the top of interest . The frequent applications include manufacturing and machinery , airplanes and aerospace , cars , medicine and robotics  . Technological progress allows more and more sensors to be manufactured using new materials and/or technologies on a microscopic scale  . One of possibilities , as a candidate for sensor sensitive applications , offers also the bilayered and/or multilayered functional materials . Recently , the technology of planar flow casting , well-known from the production of amorphous and/or nanocrystalline single-layered ribbon type materials  , was innovated by a double nozzle  . The first attempts to produce bilayered ribbons with a combination of dissimilar amorphous materials based on Fe , Ni , and Co and to investigate their structural and physical properties from the viewpoint of sensor applications can be found in literature . Owing to the fact that the bilayered alloys have to be compatible from the viewpoint of their flow characteristics and melting points not too many various systems have been prepared up to now  . Moreover , it turns out that the layer compositions determine the brittleness , cracking resistance , and bend sensitivity since the bending of bilayered ribbon induces a tensile stresses in the top layer and compressive stresses in the bottom layer . It implies that the layers of suitable magnetostrictions can positively influence the tensile-compressive properties and determine the resulting sensitivity during bending . Our previous studies were focused on CoSiB/FeSiB ribbon  and on CoFeCrSiB based bilayered ribbon of dissimilar Co/Fe content in layers  , both rather brittle . Two bilayered ribbons of the slightly different compositions , CoSiB/FeSiNbCuB and FeNbSiB/FeSiB , are investigated in the present study . In comparison to the previous bilayered alloys the present compositions exhibit at first sight a markedly better toughness and cracking resistance during bending . Therefore , the microstructure and magnetic characteristics supported by the magnetic domain observations are studied in detail from the viewpoint of the surface , interface , and bulk in the as-prepared state of ribbons . The obtained results are completed by the surface and bulk anisotropy variable in dependence on ribbon-coiling diameter and correlated with magnetostrictions of individual layer compositions . 2 Experimental The bilayered ribbons of compositions Co72.5 Si12.5 B15 /Fe73.5 Nb3 Cu1 Si13.5 B9 ( Co/Fe ) and Fe74.5 Nb3 Si13.5 B9 /Fe77.5 Si7.5 B15 ( Fe/Fe ) , 36 μm thick and 8 mm wide , were prepared by planar flow casting ( PFC ) method using the crucible divided into two chambers ended by nozzles of the same geometry . The setup of the two-chamber crucible was adjusted so that the melts of CoSiB or FeNbSiB were ejaculated directly on the rotating wheel immediately followed by the melts of the FeNbCuSiB or FeSiB . In such a way , the Co72.5 Si12.5 B15 and the Fe74.5 Nb3 Si13.5 B9 layers were during production in contact with the rotating wheel ( wheel side ; w ) , while the opposite Fe73.5 Nb3 Cu1 Si13.5 B9 and the Fe77.5 Si7.5 B15 layers were in contact with the surrounding atmosphere ( air side ; a ) . The individual layers are characterized by different magnetostriction coefficients . The magnetostrictions of the Co72.5 Si12.5 B15 and Fe77.5 Si7.5 B15 single-layer samples were obtained using a direct measuring method in the high magnetic fields  and published in Ref .  . The magnetostrictions of the Fe73.5 Nb3 Cu1 Si13.5 B9 and Fe74.5 Nb3 Si13.5 B9 single-layer samples were obtained by the same method  and not published up to now . The values are summarized in Table 1 . X-ray diffraction ( XRD ) patterns from both wheel ( w ) and air ( a ) sides of the ribbon type samples were measured by the X ’ Pert powder diffractometer with CoKα radiation ( λ = 1.789 nm ) in Bragg-Brentano geometry to check the microstructure . TESCAN LYRA 3XMU FEG/SEM scanning electron microscope ( SEM ) with an Oxford Instruments energy dispersive X-ray ( EDX ) analyzer X-Max 80 applying the accelerating voltage of 20 kV was used for observation of the microstructure morphology and measurement of element distributions along the cross-section of samples . For this purpose a sample holder depicted schematically in Fig . 1 was used . The sample was fixed in a vertical position by a plastic clamp and subsequently as a whole in resin providing sufficient stability and stiffness . The cross-section of the fixed sample could be then polished to guarantee good surface smoothness . The ribbon fixation was also suitable for the magneto-optical observation . Atomic Force Microscopy ( AFM ) using Ntegra Prima platform ( NT-MDT ) at ambient conditions has allowed to observe topography of the sample surfaces using the semi-contact/lift mode and to obtain information concerning the surface roughness . The tip used for AFM measurements was coated with CoCr magnetic film approximately 30–40 nm thick . The curvature radius of the tip was about 40 nm . The surface magnetic properties were investigated by the magneto-optical Kerr effect ( MOKE ) methods  . MOKE hysteresis loop represents a dependence of the magneto-optical angle of the Kerr rotation on the applied magnetic field . The magneto-optical ( MO ) angle is the angle between the polarizations of the light incident at and reflected from the ribbon surface . The measurements bring the information from the small surface volume determined by the penetration depth of the light ( about 20 nm ) and the beam diameter ( 0.3 mm ) . The magnetic domain structure observed on a surface and on the sample cross-section including interface between the layers  was examined using the Zeiss optical microscope adapted for the magneto-optical Kerr effect . The MOKE investigations of the mechanically stressed samples have required a special sample holders having half-round-end of diameter D 25 , 20 , 15 , and 13 mm schematically depicted in the left panel in Fig . 2 . The ribbon sample was fixed on it and MOKE measurements were done on the outer tensile stressed surface . The measured MO angles are sensitive to the in-plane longitudinal magnetization component M L that is parallel to the applied magnetic field and to the plane of the light incidence . Bulk hysteresis loops and thermomagnetic ( TMC ) curves were obtained using the vibrating sample magnetometers ( VSM ) Microsense EV9 and EG & G Princeton Applied Res . Corporation . Hysteresis loops of the unstressed and stressed samples were measured in the magnetic fields up to ±100 kA/m in configuration schematically shown in the right panel in Fig . 2 . TMC of the unstressed samples were obtained in the constant magnetic field of 4 kA/m , by the temperature increase ( decrease ) of 4 K/min from the room temperature ( RT ) up to 1100 K and back in Ar atmosphere to prevent sample oxidation . 3 Results and discussion 3.1 Microstructure and topography 3.1.1 Bulk and cross-section microstructure The X-ray diffraction ( penetrating depth about 10 μm ) patterns , taken with high statistics , did not show any extraordinary features as seen in Fig . 3 . They have consisted of two broad diffraction lines close to 2Θ = ( 52–53 ) ° and ( 96–98 ) ° the peaks of which were slightly shifted in dependence on layers compositions . Evidently both samples yielded fully amorphous structures without a presence of any crystalline phase . No clear crystallites have been observed at the polished cross-sections of both samples by SEM either ( see Fig . 4 a , b - left ) . This technique was more useful for the chemical analysis to obtain information concerning the distribution of elements across the chemically different layers . The right panels in Fig . 4 depict the element distributions in direction from the w - to a -side . Between points A and B a very thin poorly visible interlayer is formed . It is characterized by mixing of elements which is reflected by the element distributions between 19th and 25th μm at the Co/Fe sample and 9th and the 16th μm at Fe/Fe sample . The thickness of these interlayers was not constant ; it has changed along the ribbon length from approximately 1 to max . 5 μm . The Co and Fe element distributions across the ribbon are well visible also from the maps taken only for the Co/Fe sample . A rugged interface of the two compositions created owing to fast cooling is here well visible . For the Fe/Fe sample no maps are presented because of element identity and only a small difference in the Fe contents between the layers . 3.1.2 Surface topography The topography observed using the AFM at both surfaces of Co/Fe and Fe/Fe samples is presented in Fig . 5 . The images of the air-side make visible the stress relief induced by fast solidification during the production . The images taken from the opposite side reflect the surface roughness caused by the surface profile of the rotating wheel and by the air pockets rising between the wheel surface and the melt . The light points visible on the images can be in part dusty particles ; in part very small nanocrystals can be present . Their size is bellow a detection limit of both XRD and EDX methods . The differences in the smoothness of the w and a surfaces are expressed in Table 2 by the amplitude parameters : arithmetic average height , R a , and root-mean square roughness , R q , obtained during the samples mapping with an accuracy of about 10 % . It comes through that the wheel surfaces of both samples are substantially rougher which has made the magneto-optical observations impossible . 3.2 Magnetic properties 3.2.1 Thermomagnetic curves The thermomagnetic curves ( full lines ) for both Co/Fe and Fe/Fe bilayered samples are depicted in Fig . 6 a and b for increasing and decreasing temperatures , respectively . The dotted or dashed lines represent the TMC curves of the single layered samples of the same chemical compositions . The main aim of these measurements was to determine an influence of bilayer-alloying on the changes in important characteristics , namely , the Curie temperatures of amorphous samples and the initial crystallization temperatures.I ) Co/Fe bilayered sample : the TMC of the single layered amorphous CoSiB sample ( dotted line ) decreases steeply at 450 K to zero reflecting the magnetic transition into a paramagnetic state persisting up to approximately 850 K when the crystallization occurs . In a similar way the amorphous FeCuNbSiB sample changes its magnetic behavior at 600 K but the crystallization occurs at approximately 800 K. The TMC of the Co/Fe sample reflects two magnetic transitions of the amorphous structure , namely close to 450 K followed by a smooth magnetic transition above 600 K. It reaches a paramagnetic state at 700 K. This behavior is caused by the interlayer of mixed composition . Nevertheless , the initial crystallization is determined by the Fe-rich layer according to TMC of the single layered sample . II ) Fe/Fe bilayered sample : here the magnetic behavior is clearly determined by the FeSiB layer . The TMCs of bilayered and single layered FeSiB yield the same magnetic transition of the amorphous structure into a paramagnetic state and nearly the same start of crystallization . 3.2.2 Magnetic domain structure at cross-section The evolution of the magnetic domain wall movements across the interface is shown in Fig . 7 for the bilayered Co/Fe ( top panel ) and Fe/Fe ( bottom panel ) samples . The domain patterns were observed by the magneto-optical Kerr microscopy in the longitudinal configuration with magnetic field applied along the ribbon axis . As was already discussed in the previous paper  the behavior of magnetic domains at an interface is influenced by the magnetostrictions of individual layers and by the ribbon coiling . The Co/Fe bilayered sample consists of the layers with magnetostrictions of opposite signs ( see Table 1 ) and the ribbon has yielded a tendency to coiling prior fixing into the sample holder ; the domains propagate separately inside the individual layers and the interface serves as a barrier between them . Small changes in the strength of the magnetic field from 0.51 mT to 1.68 mT lead to the growth of some domains at the expense of the others , but the domain walls are still perpendicular to the interface . Different shapes of the magnetic domain patterns are visible at the cross-section of the Fe/Fe bilayered sample where both layers have positive magnetostriction coefficients ( Table 1 ) and consequently nearly no tendency to coiling . The domain propagation differs in the individual layers . In the layer being during processing in a contact with air ( FeSiB ) a fast reversal magnetization process proceeds , so that the domain evolution is already finished in the magnetic field of 0.68 mT and the single-domain state is observed . A movement of the domain wall in the opposite wheel layer ( FeNbSiB ) starts in the magnetic field of 1.15 mT in a direction from the interface towards the surface . Contrary to the Co/Fe sample , the domain wall is parallel along the interface and the ribbon axis . 3.2.3 Magnetic anisotropy The as-prepared ribbons involve internal tensile and compressive stresses distributed locally as a consequence of the PFC production process . They can be overcome by applying an external tensile and/or compressive stress which can be combined simultaneously with annealing and in such a way the induced magnetic anisotropy can be controlled and used in sensor applications with tunable sensitivity . In the present case the simple coiling of the Co/Fe or Fe/Fe sample around the special holders ( see Fig . 2 ) of various diameters induces stress in both surface and bulk and consequently the changes in the magnetic anisotropy are observed . The outer surface of the coiled sample is exposed to the tensile stress in the ribbon axis , while the inner side is exposed to the compressive stress in the ribbon plane perpendicular to the ribbon axis . The samples were coiled either with the air or wheel side out and the MOKE measurements of hysteresis loops were taken from both surfaces while the magnetic domains could be observed only from the air side because of the high surface roughness of the wheel side . The changes in the bulk anisotropy were followed by the VSM in the setup shown in Fig . 2 , right panel . Both anisotropies are determined not only by an induced tensile stress but also by the size and sign of magnetostriction coefficients . The deformation by coiling causes an extension of the outer surface layers and a contraction of the inner surface layers . Approximately in the middle of the sample thickness a layer has to exist without any longitudinal effect . If d s is a length element of this layer and the corresponding radius of curvature is R , then we can express an element of the extended layer d s ′ using an expression d s ′ = d s ( R + t /2 ) /R , where t is the thickness of the ribbon . Then a specific elongation is ε = ( d s ′ − d s ) /d s and the strain τ evoking this elongation can be obtained using the Hook law : τ = εE , where E is the Young ’ s modulus . For the Young ’ s modulus around 200 GPa  the induced strain reaches 290 MPa and 550 MPa for sample holders of 25 mm and 13 mm in diameter , respectively . It means that the tensile strain rises with decreasing diameter by approximately 22 MPa/1 mm . 3.2.3.1 Surface magnetic anisotropy The hysteresis loops taken by MOKE for tensile stressed w and a ribbon side are depicted in Fig . 8 for bilayered Co/Fe sample in the top panel and for the Fe/Fe sample bellow . The full black lines represent the hysteresis loops taken from the as-received straight ( uncoiled ) samples , the color curves ( full and dashed with circles and squares ) were obtained for samples coiled on the sample holders of denoted diameters . The domain patterns shown in Fig . 9 for the same states of bilayered Co/Fe ( top panel ) and Fe/Fe ( bottom panel ) samples were taken only from the air surfaces because of the very rough opposite w -sides . Both hysteresis loops and domain patterns represent the local magnetic properties limited to the small surface region in the corresponding layer.I ) Co/Fe sample is characterized by the negative magnetostriction , −2.6 ppm , of the CoSiB ( w -side ) layer and the positive magnetostriction +18.0 ppm of the FeNbCuSiB ( a -side ) layer ( Table 1 ) . The MOKE hysteresis loop and the domain pattern taken from the a -surface of the as-prepared straight ribbon yield an inclined hysteresis loop , a low remnant-to-saturation ratio , a high anisotropy field , and a complex domain pattern consisting of randomly oriented wide-curved and fingerprint domains . These features correspond to presence of the local stresses induced by the production process . A coiling the sample with its a -side out , inducing a tensile stress , creates an easy magnetization axis along the ribbon axis as a consequence of the positive magnetostriction . It is manifested by the rectangular hysteresis curves , a high value of the remnant magnetization , and a lower field to approach to magnetic saturation . The results are practically identical for both experiments ; using holders with 25 mm as well as 20 mm in diameter . A similar situation is also encountered in the domain structure observation . Fig . 9 top panel shows the domain pattern taken at diameter 20 mm where the fingerprint domains are well visible inside the wide-curved domains the walls of them are preferably oriented along the ribbon axis . However , the coiling of the sample around the holder with diameter of 13 mm changes noticeably the pattern showing only wide band domains having the direction of the ribbon axis . This indicates the strong uniaxial anisotropy along the ribbon axis . MOKE hysteresis loops obtained on the w -surface are depicted in Fig . 8 , top right plot . The loop of the straight ribbon is similarly influenced by the stresses from the PFC procedure , however , it exhibits lower anisotropy field in comparison to the air side due to negative magnetostriction . It induces the hard magnetization axis in the ribbon axis after the coiling . From the theoretical relation describing the dependence of magnetostriction on the applied tensile stress λ s = ( J s ΔH ) /3σ  it is possible to estimate the strain induced by different coiling diameters . In the present case the anisotropy field has changed by about ΔH = 2.8 kA/m by decreasing the coiling diameter from 25 mm to 13 mm ( see Fig . 8 , top panel , right ) . Then , for the known parameters of the CoSiB alloy , λ s = −2.6 ppm , J s = 0.52 T  the induced stress in the w -surface has changed by about 16 MPa/mm . This value is in good agreement with those obtained above from the Hook ‘ s law . A similar calculation can not be done for the opposite side because of practically identical hysteresis loops for coiling the sample either to 20 mm or to 25 mm when the magnetoelastic effect is almost saturated . II ) Fe/Fe sample consists of layers of similar composition yielding both positive values of magnetostriction , +11.8 ppm ( w ) and +32 ppm ( a ) . Due to this fact almost identical hysteresis loops taken from the a - and w -side are seen in Fig . 8 ( bottom panel ) in the straight sample . The domain pattern , taken again from the a -side only , shows the wide-curve domain and finger-print-like stress domains in the straight sample as a consequence of the PFC procedure . The sample coiling to diameter of 20 mm either with a - or w -side out yields more rectangular hysteresis loops compared to the straight sample reflecting an increase in remnant magnetization values more pronounced at a -side as seen in Fig . 8 ( bottom panel ) . Simultaneously the tensile stress induced along the ribbon axis produces wide undisturbed domains seen in Fig . 9 ( bottom right panel ) . A shift of hysteresis loops under induced stresses measured on the layer either with negative or positive magnetostriction is in good agreement with results presented in Ref .  . 3.2.3.2 Bulk magnetic anisotropy The hysteresis loops measured using VSM at both straight bilayered samples ( black lines ) and shown in Fig . 10 have yielded the magnetic parameters , coercive field , H c , saturation magnetization , M s , and remnant magnetization , M r , which are summarized in Table 3 . The accuracy of their determination is approximately 5 % . While the surface magnetic properties are mainly determined by properties of the corresponding layers , the bulk magnetic properties integrate the behavior of the whole bilayered sample . Nevertheless , the hysteresis loops of the coiled samples differ depending on the side being outer , a -side or w -side as seen in Fig . 10 .I ) In case of the Co/Fe sample with the a -side out a more rectangular curve compared to the straight state indicating the easy magnetization axis along the ribbon length is observed . We expect that contrary to the surface MOKE anisotropy detecting only the surface of the outer side , the bulk magnetic anisotropy is influenced by three contributions : the tensile stress of the outer side with positive magnetostriction , the compressive stress of the inner side with negative magnetostriction , and the interface behavior . As a result the values of anisotropy field markedly differ in the bulk and on the surface . If the sides are changed ( w -side out ) the approach to magnetic saturation requires larger magnetic fields which means that mainly the tensile stress in the negative magnetostrictive layer and the compressive stress in the positive magnetostrictive layer are responsible for inducing the hard magnetization direction in the ribbon axis . II ) In the Fe/Fe sample , where both layers have the positive magnetostriction values , the hysteresis loop in the as-prepared state is comparable with the Co/Fe sample and it is clear that properties of both bilayered ribbons are determined by Fe rich phase as was already observed on TMC . Coiling either with a - or w -side out confirms that the resulting bulk hysteresis loop consists of anisotropies of individual layers . A reversal of the first phase can be seen in the range of low magnetic fields , about ±1 kA/m , see detail in the bottom right panel of Fig . 10 . In agreement with theoretical expectations  such easy-axis behavior corresponds to the outer side of the ribbon exposed to the tensile stress and it is observed for both a - or w -side out experiments due to positive λ s of both layers . At higher magnetic fields the slow magnetization reversal with high values of the anisotropy field is a consequence of the compressive stress exposed to the inner side of the ribbon during the coiling . 3.2.4 Magnetic susceptibility The bulk mass magnetic susceptibility obtained from the derivative of the hysteresis loop , χ m = dM /dH and depicted in a magnetic field dependence yields a typical one-peak curve where the peak is positioned close to zero magnetic field . The peak values of the χ m obtained for all measured hysteresis loops were subsequently used for depicting the χ m versus 1/D dependence shown in Fig . 11 , where D is the coiling diameter . In case of the Co/Fe sample the χ m values are visibly different for corresponding 1/D values and change almost linearly from the side of negative magnetostriction ( Co w -side ) to positive one ( Fe a -side ) . On the other hand , the χ m values obtained for Fe/Fe sample are nearly identical for corresponding 1/D and independent on the sides due to positive magnetostrictions of both layers . 4 Conclusion The bilayered ribbons of the compositions Co72.5 Si12.5 B15 /Fe73.5 Nb3 Cu1 Si13.5 B9 and Fe74.5 Nb3 Si13.5 B9 /Fe77.5 Si7.5 B15 prepared by a planar flow casting exhibit functional gradation of their properties . It is documented by the detailed analysis of the surface and bulk magnetic properties in dependence on the layer composition , its magnetostriction behavior , and induced tensile stress . The amorphous structure of both samples is confirmed by X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscopy completed by EDX measurement of element distributions at the cross-section . The thermomagnetic measurements have shown that the properties of both samples are mainly influenced by the iron-rich layer being during preparation in contact with air . The changes in the surface magnetic anisotropy under the tensile stress are determined by the magnetostriction of the corresponding layer composition while the bulk magnetic anisotropy is a response to the integral properties of both layers including the interlayer . It is shown that the sensitivity to magnetic field can be increased or decreased by changing of compositions of the layers and/or by changing of the induced stress . A precise control of the surface/bulk magnetic anisotropy in the bilayered structures seems to be promising for construction of sensors with tunable sensitivity . Acknowledgments The authors thank Dr. D. Janičkovič ( Institute of Physics , SAS Bratislava , SK ) for sample production . This work has been supported by the projects SP2015/168 , CZ.1.05/1.1.00/02.0070 , CZ.1.05/1.100/02.0068 financed from European Regional Development Fund , and by the Scientific researchers of higher education institutions within the State task of the Russian Federation No . 2014/236 .