We test the impedance spectra of thermal barrier coatings in different conditions.	0
We calculate impedance spectra via finite element method in different conditions.	0
We evaluate the effect of measuring conditions on the impedance spectra.	0
We optimize the measuring parameters on the basis of experiment and calculation.	0
Thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) have been widely used in the aeroturbine engines for protecting the hot-section metal components from high temperature gas, thus effectively enhancing the turbine efficiency . These coatings typically consist of a yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) ceramic top coating, a MCrAlY alloy (M denotes Ni, Co, or Fe) bond coating (BC), and a nickel-based superalloy substrate . Since the TBCs unavoidably suffer from the shock of turbine gas with high temperature, oxidation is a critical issue and it accelerates the formation of a thermally grown oxide (TGO) layer at the interface of bond/ceramic coatings . A continuous TGO layer (usually α-Al2O3) effectively protects the substrate from further oxidation . However, as the TGO grows at the YSZ/BC interface, failure normally occurs if the strain energy density in TGO and TBCs exceeds the interfacial toughness . Moreover, great danger also exists in the fine sand particles ingested by the engines. These particles not only removes the coating by erosion but also deposit on the hot coating surface as the molten calcium-magnesia-alumina-silica (CMAS) glass, which penetrates and interacts with the ceramic layers to degrade their overall properties . However, the failure of TBCs can hardly be predicted due to the multilayered ceramic structures and harsh operating conditions.	0
Impedance spectroscopy (IS) is a non-destructive evaluation (NDE) tool of correlating the electrical properties of TBCs with their microstructure features, thus contributing to the prediction of coating failure. Ogawa et al.  ascertained the IS characteristic of the TGO layer and meanwhile estimated its thickness together with each layer of TBCs using IS method. Xiao et al.  made a great contribution to dry IS evaluation of TBCs, such as the morphology and growth of TGO layer, microstructure evolution and phase transformation of ceramic coatings. Sohn et al.  studied the TGO thickness, YSZ porosity, and cracks in TBCs using electrochemical IS techniques. Gong et al.  adopted IS to examine the microstructure evolution of TBCs under high temperature and CMAS corrosion.	0
Generally, the IS measurement is carried out by testing the ratio of the applied alternating current (AC) voltage to the response current of a material. Electrical response varies with the frequency of AC voltage owing to the physical characteristics of the studied material. For example, the IS corresponding to different components of TBCs (e.g., YSZ coating, TGO layer, and defects) commonly reflect in different frequency domains . Therefore, these components can be resolved via IS and their microstructure features are related to the impedance parameters. Changes in microstructures of TBCs due to oxidation, corrosion, and phase transformation lead to variation in electrical properties, which can be reflected from the impedance response. Consequently, the microstructure evolution of TBCs is monitored via IS measurement.	0
For conventional impedance measurement, the metal side of substrate is polished to remove the oxide for acting as one electrode. A platinum or silver paint coated on the ceramic side with an area smaller than the TBCs serves as the other electrode. Hence, a couple of asymmetric electrodes are adopted, resulting in the divergence of electrical field that has been experimentally discovered . During the measurement, a small amplitude of voltage is imposed on the TBCs specimen over a range of frequencies. The IS in both Bode and Nyquist plots are then recorded based on a certain measuring condition. Generally, it is believed that the IS are naturally determined by the physical characteristics or microstructure features of TBCs. In addition, the measuring conditions, e.g., AC voltage amplitude, temperature, and size of silver or platinum electrode, also significantly affect the corresponding IS, especially the spectra resolution. However, up to now, there are a lot of reports about the effect of microstructure features on the impedance behaviour of TBCs , whereas less attention has been paid on the IS measuring conditions .	0
Since the IS of TBCs are controlled by both physical characteristics and measuring environments, the mechanism of one measuring parameter on the impedance response can hardly be well understood just via experimental testing owing to the interaction of several factors. In addition, the measured IS are normally fitted using an equivalent circuit to obtain the electrical parameters of each component in TBCs (e.g., YSZ grains, YSZ grain boundaries, and TGO layer). However, the response caused by YSZ grain boundaries and TGO layer usually overlaps and thus cannot be clearly resolved . Furthermore, there are more than one equivalent circuit suitable to fit the IS of TBCs, hence causing problems in interpretation of the spectra. As a consequence, models of TBCs are constructed and finite element method (FEM) is used to calculate the IS for better clarifying the impedance behaviour . Deng et al.  developed a two-dimensional finite element model to examine the effect of TGO growth and conductivity change on the IS of TBCs prepared by electron beam physical vapour deposition (EB-PVD). Fleig and Maier  used finite element simulations to treat the influence of point contacts as the constituents of imperfect contacts on the total impedance. However, until recently, FEM have not been widely used to study the IS of TBCs, especially simulate the measuring environments.	0
In this work, the TBCs samples prepared by air plasma spray (APS) are considered, and the impact of measuring parameters (i.e., voltage amplitude, temperature, and size of silver electrode) on the impedance response is systematically analyzed by experimental testing combined with FEM calculation. Furthermore, the suitable values for these parameters are optimized based on the experimental results and calculated data. The aim of this work is to clarify the effect of measuring conditions on the IS of TBCs and hence optimize the testing parameters, thus contributing to achievement of the IS measurement with high resolution.	0
Air plasma spray (APS) was adopted to prepare the TBCs specimens, and the preparation procedure consisted of three steps. Firstly, the substrate of nickel-based superalloy was cut into a suitable size using a wire cut electric discharge machine, and its surface after sandblast was cleaned up with an ultrasonic wave cleaner. The chemical composition of this substrate was obtained with inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES); the result indicated that its composition was 25.4wt.% for W, 10.5wt.% for Cr, 7.2wt.% for Al, 6.3wt.% for Co, 0.8wt.% for Ti, 0.3wt.% for Mo, 0.2wt.% for Ta, and 0.1wt.% for B with nickel in balance. Secondly, a bond coating was deposited on the substrate via vacuum plasma spraying method. The composition of this bond coating was 22wt.% for Cr, 7wt.% for Al, 0.2wt.% for Y, and the balance was nickel. Thirdly, ZrO2-8wt.% Y2O3 powder with nominal particle size of 12.0–63.5μm was sprayed on the free surface of bond coating using APS techniques. The conditions of this preparation were given in  and the purity of raw material was 99.99wt.%. The thicknesses of YSZ and BC layers were about 250 and 90μm, respectively. To form a TGO layer in the TBCs, the as-prepared samples were oxidized in a resistance furnace at 950°C for 48h and then cooled down to room temperature within the furnace.	1
For IS measurements, the metal side of the specimen was mechanically ground to act as the bottom electrode. The surface of YSZ layer was cleaned and coated with silver to serve as the top electrode. To eliminate the effect induced by the position difference of silver electrode on the IS measurement , we put the silver electrode in the same place of TBCs specimen (nearly central region, as shown in (a)) in all experiments. The shape of silver electrode was round and its area gradually increased until the entire surface of YSZ was covered by silver. Each TBCs sample was baked at 300°C for 30min to ensure good attachment of the painted material to the specimen surface. The IS were measured in a resistance furnace at different temperatures using a Solartron SI 1260 Impedance/gain phase analyzer coupled with a Solartron 1296 Dielectric Interface. Different AC voltage amplitudes (0.1 to 1V), measuring temperatures (250 to 450°C), and areas of silver electrodes (7.1 to 100mm2) were selected to investigate the effect of measuring conditions on the impedance response, respectively. The voltage amplitude of AC perturbation was defined as peak to zero. The frequency was in the range of 106 to 0.1Hz and the measured spectra were normalized to the area of sample surface or bottom electrode (100mm2). The IS analysis was carried out using ZView software (Scribner Associates Inc, Southern Pines, NC). During the IS measurement, it was considered that the chemical reactions between different layers of the TBCs were negligible because of the relatively lower measuring temperature and shorter experimental period (less than ten minutes) in contrast with isothermal oxidation . For the same reason, elemental diffusion from the alloy to YSZ layer was also less significant in the course of IS testing.	1
Finite element method (FEM) was introduced to calculate the impedance response of TBCs based on the measuring conditions. According to the photograph of testing sample ((a)), a three-dimensional model with asymmetric electrode geometry was established for FEM calculation ((b)). This model consisted of two layers for the oxidized TBCs, i.e., a top layer denoting YSZ and a bottom layer TGO. The YSZ layer was regarded as an entirety without consideration of the grain boundary effect. This assumption was partially supported by the measured IS of TBCs before and after oxidation (). For the TBCs with TGO in our work, the frequency response of YSZ grain boundaries overlapped with the TGO response. In addition, the impedance of the former was obviously smaller than that of the latter.	0
The above phenomenon can be explained by the microstructures of TBCs samples. The cross sections of the specimens before and after oxidation at 950°C for 48h were displayed in . It can be observed from the secondary electron (SE) images ((a) and (b)) that this oxidation reduced the sample porosity and promoted the closure of cracks, hence leading to a decrease of the grain boundary resistance . The backscattered electron (BSE) image ((c)) exhibited a continuous TGO layer with a thickness of about 1μm at the YSZ/BC interface after oxidation. The magnified image ((d)) revealed several inter-splat boundaries, which were obviously thinner than the TGO layer. The hot exposure at 950°C still sustained the splat microstructure, as demonstrated by the fractured YSZ morphology shown in (e). Moreover, the amplified image ((f)) indicated that a single splat consisted of innumerable columnar grains, which cannot change into equiaxed grains at 950°C . Consequently, the inter-splat boundary was mainly responsible for the impedance of grain boundary. The chemical composition of the inter-splat boundary was analyzed with electron probe microanalyser (EPMA); the result indicated that the content of each impurity element (such as Si, Al, and Mg) was lower than 0.05wt.%. Thus, the segregation of SiO2, Al2O3, and MgO  at the boundaries was not obvious owing to the low temperature sintering. The EPMA analysis also demonstrated that the composition of TGO was 42.309wt.% for Al, 52.148wt.% for O, 0.873wt.% for Ni, and 4.677wt.% for Cr. Hence, this TGO layer was mainly composed of Al2O3, of which the conductivity was greatly smaller than that of grain boundary . For the as-prepared TBCs sample, the thermal exposure at 950°C for 48h favoured the chemical reaction occurring at the YSZ/BC interface; aluminium in the BC layer diffused to the YSZ layer and underwent oxidation, resulting in the formation of TGO layer (Al2O3). This continuous TGO layer played an important role in protecting the superalloy substrate at high temperature . In contrast, the diffusion and oxidation of other elements (e.g., Ni or Cr) in the BC layer or substrate were less obvious due to the relatively lower temperature (950°C) and shorter exposure period (48h) compared with several literature . Based on the above analysis, the resistance of TGO was significantly larger than that of YSZ grain boundary. Thus, it was considered that the overlapped response was mainly determined by the TGO layer, whereas the grain boundary response can be neglected .	0
A circle on the centre of top coating was used to express the silver electrode, while the bottom surface under TGO denoted the other electrode. Because of good conductivities of the metal substrate and bond coating, their IS were negligible. Moreover, the electrode response was not taken into account in this model because it is induced by an electrode reaction at the silver electrode and YSZ interface . This reaction, discussed later on, did not change the microstructure features of ceramic coatings and the response caused by the TBCs itself was not affected by the electrode reaction . Since the microstructure information of TBCs cannot be reflected from the electrode response , the electrode reaction was not taken into account in construction of the FEM model.	0
The calculation of IS was carried out using FEM with COMSOL 4.3a software, and the theoretical foundation was described as follows. Generally, the conduction current density (J), electric displacement (D), and magnetic field intensity (H) obeyed Maxwell/Ampere law:where j was the imaginary unit and ω was the angular frequency, ω=2πf (f was frequency). Since the magnetic field was passive, the following equation can be established:	0
The electric displacement (D) was calculated using Eq. :where ε was the dielectric constant, E was the electric field intensity, εr and ε0 were the relative and vacuum dielectric constants, respectively. The conduction current density (J) was given by Ohm law:where σ was the conductivity of a component in TBCs. Hence, Eq.  can be expressed in the following form:	0
The electric field intensity (E) was obtained via the electric potential (V) using Eq.  owing to the non- vorticity of electric field:	0
Thus, Eq.  was expressed using the following relation:	0
This was the control equation for calculating the IS of TBCs using FEM. Because the expression in round bracket was constant, Eq.  can be written asFor the three-dimensional model depicted in (b), the control equation was expressed asThe distribution of electric potential (V) can be obtained by solving Eq.  with computer. As a result, the conduction current density (J) was calculated via Eqs.  and , while the electric displacement (D) was achieved by Eq. . The complex current density (J∧) was therefore calculated bywhere n represented the normal direction of the electrode surface. The complex current (I∧) was calculated by integration of the complex current density (J∧):where Ω represented the electrode area. Therefore, the impedance (Z∧) was obtained using the complex current (I∧) divided by the AC voltage (U):	0
The boundary conditions for the three-dimensional model included (1) Supposing that no electrical potential dropped across the interfaces of silver/YSZ and YSZ/BC, and the potentials on the circle surface (silver electrode) and bottom surface (substrate) were set as U and 0V, respectively . The former was AC voltage and its amplitudes were set as 0.1, 0.5, and 1V, respectively. (2) Postulating that all surfaces of the TBCs were insulated except for those of the two electrodes. (3) Assuming that no charge accumulated in YSZ and TGO layers during the IS measurement , and the current density at each interface was continuous. The feasibilities of the first and third boundary conditions would be further discussed later on.	0
The geometry parameters and electrical properties for this model were set as follows. According to (b), two cuboids with the width of 10mm were used to represent the YSZ and TGO layers, respectively. The thickness of YSZ (δYSZ) was 250μm, while that of TGO (δTGO) was 1μm. The top silver electrode was a circle and its area started from 7.1mm2 to overspread the whole sample surface. The relative dielectric constants of YSZ (εrYSZ) and TGO (εrTGO) were 28 and 10, respectively . Moreover, supposing that the two constants remained unchanged with the variation of measuring temperature. The conductivities of YSZ (σYSZ) and TGO (σTGO) at different temperatures were summarized in . The YSZ conductivities were measured by four-point probe methods, while the data for TGO were based on the results of Yang et al. . Furthermore, postulating that other parameters kept unchanging when one parameter changed in the calculation.	0
Three amplitudes of AC voltage, i.e., 0.1, 0.5, and 1.0V, are selected to investigate their effect on the impedance response of TBCs, and the measured results are depicted in . The IS testing is carried out at 400°C and the area of silver electrode is 7.1mm2. According to the Nyquist plots shown in (a), the specimen exhibits a small semicircle related to the response of YSZ  at each voltage in the high frequency region. However, this semicircle is not well resolved and an inset is used to give the impedance details. Additionally, a relatively larger semicircle corresponding to TGO  appears in the medium frequency range for each curve. Generally, a TBCs system neglected the grain boundary effect is simulated with an equivalent circuit presented in . This circuit consists of two series units and each includes a resistance (R) connected in parallel with a capacitor (C) . The first unit denotes YSZ, while the second one represents TGO. Hence, the impedance of TBCs is calculated by	0
For the TBCs system with symmetric cell, the spread of electric conduction region does not occur ; therefore, the resistance (R) and capacitor (C) in Eq. (13) are obtained using the following equations :where ρ is the resistivity of a component in TBCs and S is equivalent to the effective electrode area. The resistivity of YSZ (ρYSZ) is 1×109Ωmm, while that of TGO (ρTGO) is 1×1012Ωmm . The dielectric constants of YSZ (εYSZ) and TGO (εTGO) are 35 and 6, respectively . Since the thickness of YSZ (δYSZ) is significantly larger than that of TGO (δTGO), the latter possesses greatly larger capacitor in contrast with the former. Hence, RTGOCTGO>>RYSZCYSZwhen the symmetric electrode is used. For the TBCs system with asymmetric electrode fabrication, the thicknesses of YSZ and TGO do not change while the effective electrode area of YSZ (SYSZ) is equal to the area of silver electrode on the specimen surface, attributed to the fact that a continuous TGO layer inhibits the spread of electrical conduction region at the frequencies higher than 105Hz, which is the characteristic frequency range for YSZ layer . Consequently, Eqs.  and  are still available to calculate its resistance and capacitance, respectively. Since the resistivity of TGO is obviously larger than that of YSZ, the interface of YSZ and TGO should be equipotential. As the potential of bottom electrode is zero, the electric field lines will keep parallel within the TGO layer. This means that the electric properties of TGO can also be obtained using Eqs.  and . Additionally, the effective electrode area of TGO (STGO) is larger than the silver electrode area because the TGO response is measured below 105Hz, in which the electric conduction region spreads outside the silver electrode . However, this does not influence the product of RTGO and CTGO. According to the above analysis, it can still be deduced that RTGOCTGO>>RYSZCYSZwhen the asymmetric electrode is adopted. Therefore, Eq. (13) is simplified as	0
If ω>>1, the terms without ω can be neglected and Eq.  is expressed aswhere ZHf is the impedance at high frequencies. As ω decreases, the term containing ω2 is neglected and Eq.  is approximately written aswhere ZMf is the impedance at medium frequencies. This result implies that the impedance response in the high frequency range is caused by ceramic coatings (YSZ), whereas that in the medium frequency region is mainly contributed by TGO.	0
(a) reveals that the three curves overlap in the parts of YSZ and TGO semicircles, indicating that the applied voltage has no obvious effect on the impedance response of TBCs. This phenomenon is in good agreement with what reported by Tanno et al. . (a) also shows that a third semicircle with the largest size can be observed in the low frequency region at each voltage. This semicircle is related to the electrode effect , and its resistance slightly decreases as the voltage amplitude increases. Tanno et al.  found that an electrode reaction, i.e., O2(gas)+4e−(Ptelectrode)→2O2−(YSZ), occurred at the platinum electrode/top coating interface for a TBCs system when the frequency was lower than 103Hz. In this paper, similar reaction also exists in the interface of YSZ layer and silver electrode. Increasing the applied voltage favours the conduction of oxygen ions and accordingly decreases the corresponding semicircle size. The Bode plots of impedance modulus versus frequency ((b)) also indicate that each curve overlaps in the response of YSZ and TGO, while a minor decrease in the modulus corresponding to the electrode response is observed as the AC voltage amplitude increases from 0.1 to 1V. Moreover, the Bode plots of phase angle versus frequency ((c)) reveal that each curve clearly displays three relaxation processes (phaseangle peaks), demonstrating that Bode plots give higher resolution than Nyquist plots . The phase angle peaks at 106, 103, and 0.1Hz are attributed to YSZ, TGO, and electrode effect, respectively. It can be seen that the peaks corresponding to both YSZ and TGO remain unchanged with variation of applied voltage, only the peak associated with electrode reaction decreases as the voltage amplitude increases from 0.1 to 1.0V. This result also suggests that AC voltage merely affect the electrode reaction, whereas the impedance response related to TBCs is not controlled by the voltage amplitude.	0
The IS of TBCs under different AC voltage amplitudes are theoretically calculated by FEM, and the results are shown in . In this calculation, the area of silver electrode is 7.1mm2, and the temperature is controlled at 400°C via setting the conductivities of YSZ and TGO (). Since the electrode effect is not considered, the calculated IS in Nyquist plots ((a)) only exhibits two semicircles at each voltage amplitude. In addition, the diameter of TGO semicircle is larger than that of YSZ semicircle, as consistent with the experimental results ((a)). The calculated Bode plots presented in (c) show that each curve consists of two phase angle peaks. Despite lack of the electrode peak, the YSZ and TGO peaks also locate at 106 and 103Hz, respectively, and this result is in good agreement with the measured IS ((c)). Moreover, all these calculated curves in both Nyquist and Bode plots ((a)-(c)) overlap, regardless of variation in the applied voltage amplitude. As a consequence, the theoretical calculation using FEM further demonstrates that the amplitude of AC voltage has no obvious effect on the IS of TBCs. This result also signifies that the response of YSZ and TGO is not controlled by the potential drop across the silver/YSZ interface. Thus, the drop of potential can be neglected during FEM calculation (the first boundary condition of the FEM model), as supported by Xiao et al. . The experimental results indicate that the electrode response weakens as the voltage amplitude increases; however, this does not mean that the largest voltage amplitude is the most appropriate one for IS testing. The large applied voltage may induce partial electronic conductivity of the YSZ layer, hence catalysing and accelerating the electrode reaction . Therefore, this issue must be taken into account when measuring the IS of TBCs. The thermodynamic decomposition voltage of zirconia at 500°C is 2.5V , above which the ceramic layer undergoes partial electrolysis and accordingly exhibits partial electronic conduction. Moreover, this voltage greatly decreases with increasing temperature ; hence, the AC voltage amplitude of 0.5V is more suitable than those of 0.1 and 1V for IS testing at high temperature.	0
The IS obtained by experimental testing and FEM calculation are fitted with Zview software using the equivalent circuit presented in . Each capacitor is substituted by a constant phase element (CPE) to describe the behaviour of a non-ideal capacitor, where the capacitance depends on frequency . The CPE normally includes two parameters, i.e., Y and n. The former with dimension of Ω−1cm−2sn is a parameter independent of frequency; the latter varying from 0 to 1 is an exponent without dimension. The capacitance (C) of each component (YSZ or TGO) is calculated by 	0
where R is the resistance connected in parallel with the CPE. Moreover, the electrode response is not taken into this fitting  because it cannot reflect the microstructure feature of a TBCs system, as mentioned above.	0
The resistances of YSZ and TGO obtained via fitting the spectra are presented in (a) and (b), respectively. It can be seen that the calculated results for both YSZ and TGO are constants with varying AC voltage, whereas the measured data exhibit slight fluctuations. (c) and (d) displays the capacitances of YSZ and TGO, respectively. All these results do not fluctuate obviously in the measured voltage range, as consistent with the corresponding resistances. Consequently, AC voltage cannot significantly affect the impedance response of TBCs. In addition, the deviation between the measured and calculated resistances is small, whereas the measured capacitances are larger than the calculated ones. This phenomenon is ascribed to the assumption that the material in the TBCs model ((b)) is isotropic; therefore, the inhomogeneity of the electrode system is ideally inhibited and the exponent n in Eq.  is close to 1, contributing to small calculated capacitances.The calculated IS are obtained on the basis of assumption that no charge accumulated in the YSZ and TGO layers (i.e., the third boundary condition of FEM model). To analyze the feasibility of this boundary condition, we investigate the influence of accumulated charge on the impedance response of TBCs using FEM calculation, and the results are given in . Moreover, we suppose that all the charge accumulates at the YSZ/TGO interface to simplify the calculation process. It can be seen that a low amount of separated charge (e.g., 0.0005 or 0.005C/m2) cannot obviously affect the IS of TBCs in both Nyquist and Bode plots. As the amount of charge increases to 0.05C/m2, the semicircle shrinks to a smaller dimension ((a)) and the impedance modulus at low frequencies decreases ((b)). Additionally, the height of TGO peak is also lower than that of the condition without charge accumulation ((c)). If we assumes that a direct current (DC) voltage of 1V is applied to the TBCs, based on the principle of parallel plate condenser, the relationship among the voltage (U), capacitance (C), and accumulated charge (Q) can be expressed as	0
According to (c) and (d), we suppose that the capacitances of YSZ and TGO are 6×10−7 and 5.8×10−3Fcm−2, respectively, and the surface area of TBCs specimen is 1cm2. Under this condition, the value of Q estimated from Eq. 20 is 0.006C/m2. Accordingly, this charge exhibits no obvious effect on the impedance behaviour (). In fact, we impose the AC voltage with an amplitude no more than 1V on the TBCs, and the amount of charge should be significantly smaller than the circumstance of DC polarization. Hence, its impact on the impedance response is negligible, as supported by several literature .	0
The measured IS of TBCs under different temperatures (250–450°C) are displayed in . The AC voltage amplitude during the measurement is 0.5V and the area of silver electrode is 7.1mm2. It can be observed from the Nyquist plots ((a)) that the curve significantly shrinks with increasing temperature, especially when the temperature increases from 250 to 300°C. Thus, enhancing the measuring temperature greatly decreases the resistance values of TBCs. Generally, the resistance (R) of a component in the TBCs is inversely proportional to its conductivity (σ). Under most circumstances, the correlation of temperature with conductivity can be written using the classical Arrhenius equation :where k and T are the Boltzman constant and absolute temperature, respectively. In addition, e denotes the activation energy and σ0 represents a material constant. Therefore, increasing the measuring temperature facilitates the enhancement of conductivity, contributing to decrease in the diameters of YSZ and TGO semicircles. The impedance details at 350–450°C are clearly shown in the inset of (a). It is obvious that the impedance response varies slightly at 350–450°C and thus the measurement error is relatively lower in contrast with that at 250–300°C. However, increasing the temperature also improves the proportion of electrode response in the entire impedance response; therefore, the responses caused by YSZ and TGO are relatively less obvious. Consequently, the suitable temperature for IS testing is regarded as 350–400°C.The Bode plots of TBCs with varying temperature are depicted in (b) and (c). It can be observed that increasing the measuring temperature greatly decreases the impedance modulus ((b)). In addition, the temperature also has remarkable effect on the height of YSZ peak and position of TGO peak ((c)). The YSZ peak decreases and the TGO peak shifts to high frequency as the temperature increases from 250 to 450°C. According to Eq. , the real and imaginary parts for the impedance of YSZ (Z′YSZ and Z′YSZ, respectively) can be expressed asAs the tangent of phase angle (θ) is calculated bythe phase angle of YSZ (θYSZ) can be written as	0
Since the effective electrode area of YSZ is equal to the area of silver electrode, Eq.  is simplified into the following form according to Eqs.  and :	0
Eq.  indicates that increasing the temperature leads to an enhancement of YSZ conductivity (σYSZ); therefore, its resistivity (ρYSZ) decreases as the temperature increases. Accordingly, the height of YSZ peak decreases with increasing temperature. Anderson et al.  suggested that the angular frequency for TGO peak (ωp) can be estimated as	0
This equation is further simplified using Eqs.  and :	0
Increasing the temperature decreases the values of both ρYSZ and ρTGO, thus enhancing the value of ωp and shifting the TGO peak to high frequencies. Moreover, temperature also affects the electrode response (0.1Hz) and the electrode peak increases as the temperature increases from 250 to 350°C, whereas a further increase in temperature (350–450°C) leads to a decrease in the peak height.The effect of temperature on the IS of TBCs is theoretically investigated by FEM, and the calculated spectra are shown in . The voltage amplitude adopted for this calculation is 0.5V and the area of silver electrode is set as 7.1mm2. According to the Nyquist plots ((a)), the curve greatly shrinks with increasing temperature, and this phenomenon is more obvious when the temperature increases from 250 to 300°C. This result is in good agreement with the measured Nyquist plots ((a)). The inset in (a) clearly reveals the impedance details at elevated temperatures. The Bode plots in (b) and (c) indicate that the impedance modulus and phase angle peaks follow the same changing trend as the measured results with increasing temperature, respectively. Since the IS in both Nyquist and Bode plots change obviously as the temperature varies, it is of crucial importance to accurately control the measuring temperature for better monitoring the microstructure evolution of a TBCs system.	0
The measured and calculated IS are fitted with Zview software, and the resistances of YSZ and TGO at different temperatures can be related to the corresponding conductivities using the following equation:	0
For an asymmetrical electrode configuration, the effective electrode area of YSZ (SYSZ) is equal to the area of silver electrode while that of TGO (STGO) is assumed to be equivalent to the specimen area, as analyzed above. (a) and (b) displays the effect of measuring temperature on the conductivities of YSZ and TGO, respectively. These conductivities are related to the conduction of oxygen ions  with the direction perpendicular to the TBCs specimen. It is obvious that increasing the temperature improves the conductivities of both YSZ and TGO; the experimental results agree well with the calculated ones, except for the data of TGO at 450°C. Moreover, the YSZ conductivities obtained via fitting the calculated IS ((a)) are close to those listed in , which are used as the parameters for FEM calculation. This result theoretically demonstrates what Tanno et al.  found that the impedance of YSZ was measured without spread of the electrical conduction region above 105Hz when a continuous TGO layer existed in the TBCs system. As a consequence, the effective electrode area of YSZ is equivalent to the area of silver electrode. However, the deviation between the TGO conductivities shown in (b) and  is relatively large, implying that the effective electrode area of TGO still needs to be further clarified.	0
The capacitances of YSZ and TGO as a function of temperature are presented in (c) and (d), respectively. Both measured and calculated capacitances of YSZ increase with increasing temperature ((c)), whereas the TGO capacitances show different changing trend between the measured and calculated results ((d)). According to Eq. , the capacitance is proportional to the dielectric constant, which increases as temperature elevating . Moreover, the dielectric constant also depends on the frequency; low frequencies normally lead to dispersion of the data . As a consequence, the YSZ response measured at high frequencies gives an obvious tendency for capacitance with increasing temperature, whereas the TGO capacitances do not follow this trend because the response is recorded at low frequencies.	0
The linear relationship between log σT and 1/T can be predicted via Eq. , and the results of σT as a function of 1/T for YSZ and TGO are shown in (a) and (b), respectively. It can be observed that the Arrhenius plots of both YSZ and TGO exhibit curvatures at 350°C, and the activation energy (e) at high temperature is lower than that at low temperature. Generally, the charge carriers in ceramic electrolytes are oxygen vacancies, parts of which are bound to yttrium ions under the impact of defects , making these vacancies unavailable for conduction. Therefore, the activation energy in the low temperature range includes dissociation energy and migration energy, while the former is not taken into account in the high temperature range because the oxygen vacancies are supposed to be free . Two separate straight lines are used to fit the experimental data to obtain the activation energies in different temperature ranges. The results show that the activation energies of YSZ are 1.06 and 0.61eV at the temperatures lower and higher than 350°C, respectively. These data are slightly lower than those reported by Zhang et al.  and Solier et al. , attributed to the microstructure difference in the tested specimen caused by isothermal oxidation prior to the IS measurement. The activation energy of TGO at the temperatures lower than 350°C is 0.92eV, while that in the temperature range higher than 350°C is 0.59eV. These results are relatively lower than what Yang et al.  reported probably owing to the different oxidizing environments, which result in the formation of TGO layers with different thicknesses and chemical compositions.	0
Since the ceramic layer is an non-conducting material, a small silver electrode is applied on the top surface of YSZ while the metal substrate acting as the other electrode for testing the IS of TBCs. Hence, an asymmetric cell is normally adopted in the IS measurement  and the size of silver electrode plays a vital role in affecting the impedance behaviour of TBCs . To examine the effect of silver electrode area on the impedance response, the IS testing is carried out at 400°C with a voltage amplitude of 0.5V.  shows the measured IS of TBCs with different silver electrode areas. According to the Nyquist plots ((a)), the curve obviously shrinks with increasing area of silver electrode, especially as the area increases from 7.1 to 19.6mm2. The inset gives the impedance details in the high frequency region. According to Eq. , increasing the electrode size decreases the resistance of a component in TBCs, leading to decrease in the diameters of both YSZ and TGO semicircles. Furthermore, increasing the electrode size also decreases the proportion of electrode response in the entire impedance response. Since a symmetric cell does not cause the spread of electric field lines, a large silver electrode is more suitable than a small one for the IS testing. However, it is necessary to keep a certain distance (1–2mm) between the edge of YSZ and silver electrode to avoid possible current leakage .	0
The Bode plots of TBCs are presented in (b) and (c). Increasing the electrode area obviously decreases the impedance modulus ((b)). Moreover, no obvious effect on the YSZ peak can be seen with enlarging area of silver electrode, whereas the TGO peak exhibits an increase as the electrode area increases from 7.1 to 100mm2 ((c)). According to Eq. , the phase angle of YSZ (θYSZ) is not controlled by the area of silver electrode. Anderson et al.  suggested that the height of peak associated with TGO is determined by the following relation:where αR=RTGO/RYSZ, in which RTGO and RYSZ are the impedance resistances of TGO and YSZ layers, respectively. In the course of IS measurement, the electric field in TBCs diverges with decreasing size of silver electrode, as shown in . Thus, an increase in the area of silver electrode favours the increase of current flowing through the YSZ layer, whereas varying the electrode area slightly influences the current passing through the TGO layer. Supposing that both electric conductivity and thickness of ceramic layer do not change in the measuring process, the resistance of YSZ (RYSZ) decreases as its region filled with the current increases. Hence, the value of αR increases with increasing size of silver electrode, leading to an increase in the height of TGO peak. Moreover, the electrode size also affects the peak of electrode response; the electrode peak (0.1Hz) decreases with increasing area of the silver electrode.	0
The IS of TBCs with varied area of silver electrode are calculated by FEM, and the results are shown in . For this calculation, the temperature is set as 400°C and the amplitude of AC voltage is 0.5V. According to the Nyquist plots shown in (a), the impedance resistances significantly decrease with increasing silver electrode area, especially when the area increases from 7.1 to 19.6mm2. This result is in good agreement with that based on experimental testing. The Bode plots presented in (b) indicate that the impedance modulus decreases as the electrode area increases. (c) reveals that the area of silver electrode cannot affect the YSZ peak, whereas the TGO peak increases with enlarging electrode size. This phenomenon is also consistent with the measured spectra ((b) and (c)). Accordingly, the FEM calculation further affirms that the area of silver electrode greatly affects the impedance response of TBCs.	0
The IS measured by experiment and calculated by FEM are fitted using Zview software. The YSZ and TGO resistances with varying size of silver electrode are shown in (a) and (b), respectively. It can be observed that increasing the electrode area decreases the resistances of both YSZ and TGO; the deviation between the measured and calculated results is small. (c) and (d) displays the YSZ and TGO capacitances as a function of silver electrode area, respectively. Both measured and calculated results for YSZ increases obviously with enlarging area of silver electrode. For an asymmetric electrode system, the effective electrode area for YSZ is equal to the area of silver electrode . According to Eq. , the capacitance is proportional to the electrode size; therefore, increasing the area of silver electrode leads to an increase in the YSZ capacitance. In contrast, the capacitances of TGO increases slightly as the area of silver electrode increases, attributed to the fact that the effective electrode area for TGO is less controlled by the silver electrode size .	0
All the measuring conditions are normalized to comprehensively assess their effect on the impedance response of TBCs.  display the relative change rates of the measured resistances together with capacitances versus the relative increasing rates of different measuring parameters, respectively. The relative increasing rate (rx) is defined using the following relation:where x0 and xn are the initial and a certain values for one measuring parameter, respectively. The relative change rate of the resistance or capacitance (ry) is calculated bywhere Y(x0) and Y(xn) are the resistances or capacitances measured at x0 and xn, respectively.	0
It can be observed from (a) that the AC voltage amplitude has little influence on the resistances of both YSZ and TGO, whereas the measuring temperature ((b)) exerts more obvious effect on the impedance value compared to the area of silver electrode ((c)). A small increasing rate of 20% in the measuring temperature leads to significant decreases in the two resistances, i.e., 84.1% for YSZ and 79.6% for TGO. Moreover, a further increase in the temperature almost sustains the large change rates of these resistances. In contrast, a greatly larger increasing rate of 1308% in the silver electrode area can achieve the relative decreasing rates of 82.0% and 78.0% for YSZ and TGO resistances, respectively.	0
(a) indicates that the capacitances of YSZ and TGO do not change obviously in the measured voltage range, whereas increasing the measuring temperature ((b)) and size of silver electrode ((c)) greatly increases the capacitance of YSZ. For example, the YSZ capacitance increases to 1100% and 5560% with the relative increasing rates of 80% for temperature and 1308% for electrode area, respectively. However, temperature still exerts more obvious effect than electrode size, as an increasing rate of 176.1% in electrode size only leads to 720% capacitance increasing. In contrast, the TGO capacitance shows slight variation as the temperature or electrode area increases, probably due to the dispersion of the data measured at low frequencies .	0
The impacts of measuring conditions on the IS of TBCs are systematically studied by experimental testing combined with FEM calculation. These conditions include AC voltage amplitude, temperature, and area of silver electrode. The grain boundary effect of YSZ layer is not taken into account for constructing the FEM model, because the microstructure characterization indicate that the oxidation at 950°C for 48h leads to the formation of a continuous TGO layer (Al2O3), of which the resistance is significantly larger than that of the inter-splat boundary. The optimization of measuring parameters is then carried out based on the tested results and calculated data. Moreover, the measured IS are also simulated using ZView software. The following conclusions can be drawn:	0
(1) AC voltage amplitude has no obvious effect on the IS of TBCs from both aspects of experimental testing and theoretical calculation. Thus, the potential drop across the silver/YSZ interface can be neglected during FEM calculation. Despite this, a relatively larger amplitude of AC voltage is needed in the course of IS measurement for lowering the electrode response and obtaining an obvious current signal, which favours further analysis and calculation. However, the voltage amplitude should not be large enough to avoid partial electronic conduction of the YSZ layer, especially at high temperature. As a result, the AC voltage of 0.5V is more suitable than those of 0.1 and 1V for IS testing. Moreover, the FEM calculation also demonstrates that the accumulated charge in YSZ and TGO does not obviously affect the IS of TBCs under the condition of this work and thus it is negligible in construction of the FEM model.	0
(2) Measuring temperature greatly affects the impedance response of TBCs. The impedance resistance significantly decreases with increasing temperature, especially when the temperature increases from 250 to 300°C, as demonstrated by both measured and calculated results. In contrast, the IS of TBCs specimens are relatively stable at elevated temperatures. Additionally, the YSZ peak decreases and the TGO peak shifts to high frequencies as the measuring temperature increases. However, increasing temperature also enhances the proportion of electrode response in the entire response. As a consequence, the suitable temperature for IS measurement is considered as 350–400°C. Furthermore, Arrhenius plots of both YSZ and TGO exhibit curvatures at 350°C, indicating different mechanisms for ionic conduction in the high and low temperature ranges. Because the IS in both Nyquist and Bode plots change obviously with varying temperature, it is of crucial importance to accurately control the measuring temperature for better monitoring the microstructure evolution of a TBCs system.	0
(3) For TBCs sample, enhancing the area of silver electrode greatly shrinks the curves in Nyquist plots, especially when the electrode area increases from 7.1 to 19.6mm2. In addition, the height of TGO peak in Bode plots increases with increasing electrode size. These results are well supported by FEM calculation. Furthermore, increasing the electrode size also decreases the proportion of electrode response in the entire impedance response. Since the electric field diverges as the electrode size decreases, a large silver electrode is more suitable than a small one for the IS testing. However, it is necessary to keep a certain distance (1–2mm) between the edge of YSZ and silver electrode to avoid possible current leakage.	0
(4) The comprehensive assessment of the measuring conditions shows that the AC voltage amplitude cannot obviously influence the resistances and capacitances of YSZ and TGO; the measuring temperature exhibits more obvious effect on the IS of TBCs compared to the area of silver electrode. A small increasing rate of 20% in the measuring temperature leads to significant decreases (about 80%) in the resistances of both YSZ and TGO layers, whereas a greatly larger increase in the area of silver electrode (1308%) can achieve the relative decreases of 80% in the two resistances. For the capacitance of YSZ, the effect of measuring temperature is still more obvious than that of silver electrode area, because an increasing rate of 176.1% in the electrode size leads to 720% capacitance increasing, whereas a lower increasing rate of 80% in the temperature can achieve the relative increasing rate of 1100% for YSZ capacitance. In contrast, both the temperature and silver electrode size show slight effect on the TGO capacitance, which is measured at low frequencies and thus probably exhibits dispersive data.	0
The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of the  (51401243, 11472237, and 11272275, 51590891) together with the (No. 2015T80883 and 2014M552151).	0
	0
Deformation parameters have significant influences on the grain microstructure.	0
The dislocation substructure is also very sensitive to the deformation parameters.	0
The bulging of initial grain boundaries is the main nucleation mechanism of DRX.	0
The complete DRX domains are determined by DRX volume fractions contour map.	0
Generally, metals or alloys undergo the large plastic deformation in hot forming processes . The complex microstructural evolutions  are often induced by the multiplicate hot deformation mechanisms, such as work hardening (WH), dynamic recovery (DRV) and dynamic recrystallization (DRX) . It is well known that the dynamic recrystallization is an effective means to refine grains . In recent years, some researches have been reported on the microstructural evolution and dynamic recrystallization behaviors of various alloys. For example, the dynamic recrystallization behaviors of typical nickel-based superalloy , 30Cr2Ni4MoV steel , 7075 aluminum alloy , forged 42CrMo steel , as-extruded 42CrMo steel , Fe–30Mn–3Si–3Al TWIP steel , low-carbon bainite steel , AISI 4140 alloy steel , Fe–30Mn–5Al steel , AISI 304L and 316L stainless steels , commercial purity titanium , high manganese austenitic stainless steel , 4130 and 4340 steels , and a medium carbon microalloyed steel  were studied, and the suitable DRX kinetics models were established to predict the volume fractions of DRX. It is found that the microstructural evolutions during dynamic recrystallization are sensitive to the processing parameters, such as strain rate, deformation temperature and strain. Therefore, understanding the microstructural evolution and dynamic recrystallization behaviors of metals or alloys is very important.	0
Nickel-based superalloys, which have excellent high-temperature mechanical properties, are widely used in modern aero engines and gas turbines. Over the last decades, some investigations on the hot deformation behaviors of nickel-based superalloys have been reported . Wen et al.  identified the optimum processing parameters for an aged GH4169 superalloy by processing maps. Shore et al.  found that the wrought Incoloy 901 alloy has the better hot workability, compared to the cast one. Lin et al.  investigated the effects δ phase on the fracture characteristics of an aged nickel-based superalloy, and found that δ phase is the potential nucleus sites for microvoids. Ning et al.  established the processing maps for GH4169 superalloy, and the safe hot working domains were determined. Lin et al.  found that the fracture of nickel-based superalloy is attributed to the coupling effect of microvoid and localized necking. Etaati et al.  investigated the hot deformation behaviors of Ni–42.5Ti–7.5Cu and Ni–42.5Ti–3Cu alloys, and established the suitable constitutive equations to predict the flow stress. Also, Ning et al.  established phenomenological constitutive equations to describe the hot deformation behaviors of the post-cogging FGH4096 superalloy. Wu et al.  found that DRX has significant effects on the activation energy, as well as the power dissipation maps of a Ni–Cr–Co based P/M superalloy. Zhang et al.  found that the hot deformation behaviors of a powder metallurgy nickel-based superalloy FGH96 are significantly affected by the initial states. Wang et al.  discussed the effects of dynamic recrystallization mechanism on the hot deformation characteristics of a nickel-based corrosion resistant alloy by processing maps. Antonov et al.  studied the precipitate phase stability and compositional dependence on alloying additions in γ–γ′–δ–η Ni-base superalloys.	0
Although a number of studies have been carried out to investigate the hot workability and microstructural evolution of different superalloys, the research on the evolutions of grain microstructure and dislocation substructure are still limited for nickel-based superalloys. The objective of this study is to systematically discuss the effects of hot deformation parameters on the evolutions of grain microstructure and dislocation substructure, as well as the DRX degree. Meanwhile, the contour map is established based on the area fractions of DRX.	0
A commercial nickel-based superalloy (GH4169) was selected in this study, and its chemical composition (wt.%) is: 52.82Ni–18.96Cr–5.23Nb–3.01Mo–1.00Ti–0.59Al–0.01Co–0.03C–(bal.)Fe. Cylindrical specimens with a diameter of 8mm and a height of 12mm were cut down from the wrought billet. The specimens were solution treated at 1040°C for 45min followed by water quenching. Hot compressive tests were performed on a Gleeble-3500 thermo mechanical simulator under the strain rate range of 0.001–1s−1 and deformation temperature range of 920–1040°C. In order to reduce the friction and avoid the adhesion, tantalum foil with the thickness of 0.1mm was placed between the specimen and dies. Before loading, each specimen was heated to the designed deformation temperature at a rate of 10°C/s, and then soaked for 300s to reduce thermal gradient. Then, the specimens were compressed, and the height reductions are between 11% and 70%. i.e., true strains are between 0.12 and 1.2. After hot compressive deformation, the specimens were immediately quenched by water at a cooling rate of 500°C/s.	1
In addition, grain microstructure was observed by a Leica DMI5000M optical microscope (OM). Samples for OM analysis were sliced along the compression axis section, mechanically polished, and then chemical etched for 3–5min with a solution consist of 100ml HCl+100ml CH3CH2OH+5g CuCl2 at room temperature.  shows the microstructure of the studied superalloy before hot deformation. From , it can be observed that the grains were nearly equiaxed, and the mean grain size was evaluated as 75μm by the linear intercept method (ASTM: E112-12). In order to analyze the dislocation substructures in the deformed specimens, the transmission electron microscope (TEM) observations were performed on the JEM-2100F microscope. Samples for TEM observations were firstly machined from the deformed specimens, and then grinded into 70–80μm thick foils. Subsequently, some disks with 3mm in diameter were punched out from the grinded thin foils, and electro-polished using a solution of perchloric acid and ethanol (1:9 in volume).	1
Generally, the interfacial friction between the dies and specimen is unavoidable during hot deformation. In order to exclude the effects of friction on flow stress, all the stress-true curves are corrected based on the methods introduced in Ref. .  illustrates the typical true stress–strain curves of the studied superalloy. From , it is observed that the flow stress first rapidly increases to a peak, and then gradually decreases until a relatively steady state reaches under given deformation conditions. The characteristics of flow stress are related to the competing phenomenon between work hardening and dynamic softening (induced by DRV and DRX) mechanisms during hot deformation. At the initial stage of hot deformation, the main deformation mechanisms are the work hardening and dynamic recovery. The dislocations rapidly multiply and accumulate, resulting in the obvious work hardening. Meanwhile, because the stacking faults energy of the studied superalloy is relatively low, the dynamic recovery is too weak to overcome the work hardening at the initial stage of hot deformation. Thus, the flow stress remarkably increases. With the further straining, the flow stress gradually decreases. This is because the dynamic recrystallization results in the distinct dynamic softening. It is well known that the dislocation is swept away by grain boundaries in the course of new grain formation. So, the work hardening rate is decreased . Consequently, the flow stress is gradually reduced with the further straining. When the work hardening and dynamic softening reach a new balance, the steady flow stress appears.	0
In addition,  indicates that the flow stress is significantly affected by strain rate and deformation temperature under the tested conditions. When the strain rate is decreased or the deformation temperature is increased, the flow stress obviously decreases. The drop in flow stress is related to DRX behavior. It is well known that the nucleation and growth of DRX are thermal activation process. One the one hand, although low strain rate decreases the rate of DRX nuclei, it provides sufficient time for DRX grains to grow up. On the other hand, high deformation temperature increases the grain boundary mobility, and thus also promotes the growth of DRX grains. So, the dynamic softening is increased, leading to the decreased flow stress . Meanwhile, it is observed that the flow stress shows a plateau shape characteristic around the peak stress when the deformation temperature is low or the strain rate is high, as shown in . The plateau shape characteristic is related to the long competition time between the work hardening and dynamic softening. Moreover, the dynamic recrystallization rate is low due to the limited deformation time under high strain rate, as well as the slow grain boundary mobility under low deformation temperature. So, a long time is needed to get the balance between the work hardening and dynamic softening, leading to a noticeable plateau shape characteristic around the peak stress.	0
In order to understand the effects of deformation degree on the grain microstructure and dislocation substructure, the hot compression tests with different final true strains (ε1=0.12,ε2=0.27,ε3=0.52 and ε4=1.20) were carried out under 1040°C and 0.01s−1. Here, ε1 is close to the critical strain for the onset of dynamic recrystallization . ε2 and ε3 represent the deformation degrees which are larger than the peak strain. Here, the peak strain is corresponding to the peak stress, and lower than the steady strain (i.e., the strain corresponding to the steady stress). ε4 is corresponding to the steady strain. In present study, the peak strain is 0.15, as shown in b.  shows the effects of deformation degree on the grain microstructure. From , it can be easily found that the grain microstructures are significantly affected by the deformation degree. Under the relatively small deformation degree (ε=0.12), there are some serrated grain boundaries, as shown in a. It is observed that small dynamic recrystallized grains grow near the old grain boundaries, indicating that the grain boundaries are the favorable sites for the nucleation of DRX grain. When the true strain is increased to 0.27, the typical necklace structures can be found (marked with arrows in b and c), i.e., small DRX grains appear on the initial grain boundaries and tend to completely occupy the initial grain boundaries . With the further straining, the previous DRX grains obviously grow up, as shown in d. Meanwhile, the necklace structures nearly disappear because the nucleation and growth of DRX nuclei continue. Under relatively large deformation degree (ε=1.20), the uniform equiaxed fine DRX grains appear, as shown in e and f, indicating that the dynamic recrystallization is finished. Therefore, it can found that the number of DRX grains increases with the increase of deformation degree.	0
 shows the effects of deformation degree on the dislocation substructures under 1040°C and 0.01s−1. From a, it can be seen that the matrix contains the high dislocation densities under relatively small deformation degree (ε=0.12), and the nucleation of dynamic recrystallization grain is not obvious. The high dislocation densities are related to the intense work hardening at the initial deformation stage, and the most of DRX nuclei are in incubation period. Meanwhile, a reveals that the distribution of dislocations is heterogeneous under relatively small deformation degree. When the true strain is increased to 0.27 (b), numerous dislocation networks appear. With the further straining (ε=0.52), polygonal subgrains, as well as the regularly-arranged dislocations, can be observed, as shown in c. This is because the dislocation sliding is dominant at the early deformation stage. With the further straining, the dislocation climb occurs and the dislocations arrange themselves as subgrain boundaries , which indicate the occurrence of dynamic recovery. Because the deformation near the grain boundaries is inhomogeneous, it is potential for subgrains to undergo extensive DRV. i.e., the dislocations within subgrains are swept away . Then, these subgrains may become DRX nuclei once successful bulging occurs at the initial grain boundaries. It is reported that the original formation of DRX nuclei depends on the DRV substructures . However, the stacking fault energy of studied superalloy is relatively low, and DRV is very weak. Hence, the effects of DRV on the nucleation of DRX grain are limited for the studied superalloy.  shows the typical grain boundary bulging feature at the true strains of 0.27 and 0.52, which indicates that the nucleation of DRX grain is through the local grain boundaries bulging. In fact, for the studied face-centered-cubic (fcc) superalloy, the ‘bulging’ of the prior grain boundaries is the main nucleation mechanism, which is similar to some other fcc alloys such as 316L(N)  and alloy D9 . Under the relatively large deformation degree (ε=1.20), a large number of DRX grains appear not only at the grain boundaries, but also within grains. As a result, fine DRX grains with low dislocation density can be observed, as shown in d. This phenomenon is in a good agreement with the grain microstructure shown in d. So, the evolution of dislocation substructure can be characterized as: high dislocation density→dislocation network→subgrain→DRX grain.	0
Generally, the grain growth is driven by the strain energy (mainly dislocation energy) . The variations of dislocation substructure with strain are related to the change of strain energy (Es), and can be expressed as ,where α is a dislocation interaction term. ρM represents the dislocation density. G and b are the shear modulus and burgers vector, respectively. Because the obstacles such as the dislocation forests or cellular dislocation do not appear in the glide plane at the initial deformation stage, the free pass that the dislocation can move is proportional to ρ-1/2. So, the Kocks–Mecking (KM) model can be used to describe the dislocation evolution .	0
If there is no annihilation or arrangement of dislocation, the relationship between the dislocations density in the matrix and deformation degree can be written as,	0
Taking the integration of both sides of Eq.  gives,where k1, k2 and k are material constants.	0
Obviously, Eq.  shows that the strain energy increases when the deformation degree is increased. Meanwhile, the driven force for DRX increases. Thus, the occurrence of DRX becomes easy under the large deformation degree. Due to the nucleation and growth of DRX grain, as well as the dynamic recovery, the dislocation density decreases. So, the strain energy is reduced. Therefore, a uniform equiaxed fine grain microstructure can be obtained after the dynamic recrystallization is completed. Still, the nucleation of DRX cannot easily occur at the newly-created DRX grain boundaries, because very high driving force necessary to offset the high surface tension of the bulge is not available in hot deformed microstructure .	0
In this section, the effects of deformation temperature on the grain microstructure are discussed. e and a and b show the grain microstructures in the deformed specimens under 920, 980 and 1040°C, respectively. Here, the true strain and strain rate are 1.2 and 0.01s−1, respectively. It is clearly seen that the grain microstructures are greatly dependent on the deformation temperature. Under the relatively low deformation temperature (920°C), there are many elongated original grains, but only a few DRX grains, as shown in a. Meanwhile, it can be found that the recrystallized grain size is less than 0.5μm. When the deformation temperature is increased to 980°C, some equiaxed DRX grains appear and the average grain size can be estimated as 10μm, as shown in b. Under the deformation temperature of 1040°C, there is no sign of the initial grains, and the grain microstructure is notably refined (shown in e).	0
Generally, the dynamic recrystallization occurs when a critical dislocation density (ρc) appears, and the following expression can be used to describe the critical conditions for ρc.where s is the grain boundary energy. l is the dislocation mean free path. ε̇ is the strain rate. b is the Burgers vector. τ is the dislocation line energy. m is the mobility of grain boundary. Usually, m can be expressed as the following Arrhenius function .where m0 is a material constant. R and T are the universal gas constant and deformation temperature, respectively. Qm is the activation energy of grain boundary mobility.	0
According to Eqs. , it is clear that increasing deformation temperature can enhance the mobility of grain boundaries, and leads to the decreased critical dislocation density for the initiation of dynamic recrystallization. Thus, the high deformation temperature can prompt the initiation of dynamic recrystallization. The nucleation rate can be expressed as ,where ṅ is the nucleation rate. C is a material constant. T is the deformation temperature. Qact is the activation energy of DRX nucleation. The exponent m is close to 1 .	0
Once the nucleation of dynamic recrystallization takes place, the DRX nuclei can gradually grow up with the further straining. The growth of DRX nuclei is the results of grain boundaries migration. Therefore, the growth rate of DRX nuclei is equal to the rate of grain boundaries migration . i.e.,where ρM and ρDRX are the dislocation densities in the matrix and DRX nuclei, respectively. G and b are the shear modulus and burgers vector, respectively. α is a dislocation interaction term. t is the deformation time.	0
From , it can be found that the nucleation and growth of DRX nuclei are sensitive to the strain rate and deformation temperature. Under a given strain rate, the high deformation temperature can promote the rapid nucleation of DRX grains. Meanwhile, when the deformation temperature is increased, the mobility of grain boundary is enhanced (according to Eq. ), leading to the increase rate of grain boundaries migration. So, the DRX nuclei can easily grow up under high deformation temperature. Therefore, the grain microstructure is much more homogeneous under high deformation temperature than that under low deformation temperature.	0
and d show the effects of deformation temperature on the dislocation substructures in the deformed specimens under the strain rate of 0.01s−1 and true strain of 1.2. Obviously, the dislocation substructures are significantly affected by the deformation temperature. From a, it can be found that there are some dislocation pile-ups within grains under 920°C. This indicates that the strain energy is still high after the hot deformation. The reason for this phenomenon is that both DRX and DRV rate are slow under the relatively low deformation temperature. b shows that the main dislocation substructures are subgrains when the deformation temperature is 980°C. It is believed that the subgrains near the grain boundaries can be DRX nucleus. With the further straining, the subgrain can transform to DRX grains. There is a clear triple junction on grain boundaries under 1040°C (d), which indicates the complete dynamic recrystallization. Meanwhile, the dislocation density within grains is very low. This is because that the dislocation annihilation and rearrangement are easy due to the enhanced nucleation and growth of DRX nuclei under the relatively high deformation temperature.	0
In this section, the effects of strain rate on the grain microstructures are discussed. and b show the grain microstructures in the deformed specimens under 0.001, 0.1 and 0.01s−1, respectively. Here, the true strain and deformation temperature are 1.2 and 980°C, respectively. Under the relatively low strain rate, the equiaxed and homogeneous grains are dominant, which indicates the complete dynamic recrystallization (shown in a). When the strain rate is increased to 0.01s−1, both the original large grain and the fine DRX grains coexist, as shown in b. Meanwhile, it can be found that number of DRX grains obviously decreases under the strain rate of 0.1s−1, and the elongated original grains can be found, as shown in b. Also, it reveals that some fine DRX grains preferentially nucleate at the vicinities of grain boundaries (shown in b). From  and b, it can be found that the DRX grains become fine, while there are still some original coarse grains under the high strain rate. This is because DRX under the relatively high strain rate is governed by high nucleation rate due to the combined effects of high stored energy and adiabatic heating . Thus, the number of DRX grains increases with the increase of strain rate, according to Eq. . However, the growth of DRX nuclei is restrained due to the limited deformation time under the given deformation degree and temperature. Eq.  also confirms that the growth rate of DRX nuclei becomes slow with the increase of strain rate. So, the fine DRX grains appear under the relatively high strain rate. However, the whole grain microstructure is heterogeneous in the deformed material.	0
 shows the effects of strain rate on the dislocation substructures in the deformed specimens under the deformation temperature of 980°C and true strain of 1.2. From a, it can be found that DRX grains with low dislocation density can be observed under relatively low strain rate (0.001s−1). However, the dislocation density is high within grains under the strain rate of 0.1s−1. These grains may be the deformed original grains or the DRX grains. It is well known that the dislocation generation and proliferation easily result in strain hardening, while the annihilation and rearrangement of dislocation are related to strain softening (including dynamic recovery and dynamic recrystallization), respectively. For the studied superalloy, there is an increased dislocation density within grains under relatively high strain rate. The dislocation substructures are partly removed by the formation of subgrains during the dynamic recovery. Most of the dislocation substructures are rearranged and annihilated by the occurrence of DRX. Under the given deformation temperature, the high strain rate can lead to a rapid dislocation generation. However, the dynamic recovery and dynamic recrystallization are restrained due to the limited deformation time. Therefore, high dislocation density is retained under the relatively high strain rate.	0
In order to understand the grain refinement mechanism by DRX, it is necessary to differentiate the DRX grains and the deformed ones. In this study, it can be easily found that DRX grains appear at the elongated deformed grain boundaries, as shown in . Compared with the deformed grain, it reveals that the size of DRX grains is very small and most of DRX grains are equiaxed. Therefore, according to the size and shape of grains, the DRX grains can be easily to be differentiated. Also, there are some other methods such as “grain orientation spread (GOS)” approach to differentiate DRX grains . The DRX fraction is an important factor to the control grain microstructure. In order to quantify DRX degree, the area fraction of DRX is measured by the Image Pro-Plus software 6.0. The area fraction of DRX (Af) is defined as ,where Ad denotes the area of every dynamic recrystallized grains, Ai denotes the area of each metallograph. In this study, four grain microstructure images are used to evaluate the area fraction of DRX for each deformation condition.	0
Based on the measured area fractions of DRX, the contour map is constructed to describe the coupling effects of deformation parameters on the dynamic recrystallization behavior, as shown in . Obviously, it can be found that the area fractions of DRX are sensitive to the deformation temperature and strain rate. Under the given strain rate, the area fraction of DRX (Af) rapidly increases with deformation temperature. For example, when the strain rate is 0.01s−1, Af is only 40% under the deformation temperature of 920°C (a). When the deformation temperature is increased as 980°C, Af is 75% (b). Meanwhile, for the given deformation temperature, the area fraction of DRX under low strain rate is higher than that under high strain rate. Based on the grain microstructure () and the measured area fractions of DRX, it can be found that the deformed grains will be represented by newly-formed equiaxed grains when DRX is complete. Generally, if recrystallized fraction is more than 95%, the recrystallization is assumed to be complete . In order to acquire a uniform grain microstructure, the complete DRX must be guaranteed. In other words, the volume fraction of DRX should be higher than 95%. From , it reveals that the complete DRX domains are: (i) the deformation temperature range of 970–1040°C and strain rate near/below 0.001s−1; and (ii) the temperature range of 1010-1040°C and the strain rate of 0.01s−1. The identified complete DRX domains can be useful to optimize the hot working parameters.	0
In order to study the evolution of grain size of the whole microstructure during hot deformation, the average grain size can be calculated as ,where dav is the average grain size. ddrx is the dynamic recrystallized grain size, which is measured after the complete dynamic recrystallization. For the studied superalloy, the detailed procedures to calculate the ddrx can be seen in authors’ previous publication . An is the unrecrystallized volume fraction, which can be determined by Eq. . dn is the unrecrystallized grain size, which can be expressed as Eq. .	0
 illustrates the evolutions of Af and dav with the true strain under 1040°C and 0.01s−1. From , it can be found that the volume fraction of DRX increases with the increase of true strain. It is nearly close to 1 at the final strain of 1.2. Meanwhile, when the deformation degree is relatively small, dav is relatively large, but Af is relatively low. This result is consistent with the observed microstructures shown in a and b. In addition, it reveals that the dav decreases with the increase of Af, as shown in . For the tested condition, the average grain size is refined from 75μm to 15μm due to the occurrence of complete DRX. Hence, it can be concluded that the dynamic recrystallization is an effective means for grain refinement.	0
The effects of hot deformation parameters on the grain microstructure and dislocation substructure in a typical nickel-based superalloy are investigated. Some important conclusions can be summarized as:	0
The number of DRX grains increases with the increase of deformation degree and temperature. However, the increase of strain rate remarkably decreases the number of DRX grains.	0
The dislocation substructures are sensitive to the deformation degree, and the evolution of dislocation substructure can be considered as: high dislocation density→dislocation network→subgrain→DRX grain. The nucleation and growth of DRX grains can cause the annihilation and rearrangement of dislocation. The high deformation temperature and low strain rate can prompt the nucleation and growth of DRX grains. Thus, there is a low dislocation density within grains due to the sufficient release of stored deformation energy.	0
The contour map based on the DRX volume fractions is constructed for the studied superalloy. The complete DRX domains under the true strain of 1.2 are: (i) the deformation temperature range of 970–1040°C and strain rate near/below 0.001s−1; and (ii) the temperature range of 1010–1040°C and the strain rate of 0.01s−1.	0
This work was supported by  (Grant Nos. 51375502 and 51305466),  (Grant No. 2013CB035801),  (Grant No. 2014T70782),  (Grant No. zzyjkt2014-01), and the  (Grant No. 117327), China.	0
Molten salt reactor (MSR) has been considered one of the advanced Generation IV concept reactors owing to their inherent safety, online refueling capabilities, and highly efficient power generation [,]. China has been developing a thorium molten salt reactor (TMSR) since 2011, because this type of reactor can burn thorium fuel and produce hydrogen from seawater using the waste heat produced in the reactor [,]. Hastelloy N, which is a solution-strengthened nickel-based superalloy, exhibits superior strength, good oxidation resistance, and excellent corrosion resistance [,]. It has been used in the molten salt reactor experiment (MSRE) system in the 1960s []. This alloy is still the most promising structural material for recently developed TMSR [,].	0
Many premature failures of a component, such as micro-fissures and residual stress corrosion cracking, are related to the microstructure and strength of the weld [,]. Thus, it is important to evaluate the microstructure and mechanical properties of joints made from Hastelloy N. It has been reported that the tensile strength and elongation of an as-welded joint were to some extent lower than those of the base metal for Hastelloy N alloy, with tensile specimens failing in the fusion zone of the joint []. The fusion zone was considered the weakest region [,]. The Hastelloy N superalloy is composed of a γ phase matrix and some string-like primary M6C carbides distributed in the matrix []. The primary M6C carbides in the joint readily transform into an undesirable eutectic phase during welding [,], which is responsible for the poor mechanical properties of the joint [,].	0
A post-weld heat treatment (PWHT) is usually applied as a remedy to modify the as-welded microstructure and relax the welding residual stress of most weldments, thereby imparting optimum reliable properties []. A few previous studies showed that joints made from Hastelloy N after PWHT exhibit better mechanical properties than as-welded specimens; this could be attributed to the microstructure evolution during PWHT []. However, the microstructure evolution path during PWHT and the influence mechanism on the mechanical properties of the joint remain unclear. In this study, the microstructure evolution and mechanical properties of Hastelloy N superalloy welds before and after PWHT at different temperatures were systematically investigated. The results should help understand the influence mechanism of PWHT on the mechanical properties of such joints and optimize the welding and PWHT parameters for Hastelloy N.	0
The material used in this study was a hot-rolled Hastelloy N superalloy with dimensions of 500 mm × 300 mm × 20 mm. The longitudinal direction of the plate was made parallel to the rolling direction. The filler used for the welding process was an ERNiMo-2 wire with a diameter of 1.2 mm.  lists the chemical compositions (wt. %) of the Hastelloy N superalloy and ERNiMo-2 filler. Gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW) was performed in a butt-joint configuration with a 60° V groove. Before welding, the plates were polished with a brush and thoroughly washed with acetone to remove any greasy dirt and impurities.  lists the welding parameters used in this experiment. Multiple passes were applied with a 30% overlap between the passes, and the interpass temperature was below 93 °C.	1
After welding, the specimens were divided into two groups along a direction perpendicular to the weld. One group was for the as-welded specimen examination, and the other one was for the PWHT specimen examination. The PWHT specimens were heat treated to relax their stress, as shown in . A high heat temperature treatment and a slow cooling treatment were applied. After the heat treatment, the as-welded and heat-treated specimens were cut along the plate perpendicular to the welding direction. This was done to perform cross-sectional metallographic analyses and micro-hardness examinations.	0
The specimens for the metallographic observation were polished with a 0.05 μm alumina powder and etched in a mixed solution (1.2 g FeCl3 + 10 ml HCl + 20 ml H2O) for 30 s. They were then examined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, LEO 1530 V P). The carbide specimens for the X-ray diffraction (XRD, 18KW D/MAX2500V+/PC) analysis were powders prepared using an electrochemical extraction method from the alloy specimens. The as-welded and heat-treated specimens were anodically extracted at 2 V with a nickel cathode in a 25% HCl-75% methanol solution at room temperature. A sufficient amount of precipitate powders was collected for the XRD analysis.	1
A transmission electron microscope (TEM, FEI Tecnai G2 F20S-TWIN) equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) was employed for phase identification. The TEM specimens were prepared by twin jet polishing with a 5% perchloric acid and 95% ethanol solution at temperatures ranging from −35 to −29 °C.	1
The hardness measurement of the mechanically polished alloy weld specimens under different conditions was conducted using a ZHV-30 micro-Vickers hardness tester under a load of 500 gf. The micro-hardness was obtained as the average value of five random hardness measurements from each specimen.	0
Tensile tests were carried out on a set of three specimens at 625 °C using a Zwick Z100 universal testing machine. The strain rates were respectively 0.005 and 0.05 min−1 before and after yielding, as per ASTM E21.  shows the geometry of the tensile specimens. The gauge zone with a width of 20 mm was marked before each tensile test. The yield strength, ultimate tensile strength, and elongation of the specimens were then measured manually. The yield strength and ultimate tensile strength were defined as the stress with an offset of 0.2% and the maximum stress, respectively. The elongation percentage was determined as the maximum elongated gauge length divided by the original gauge length. The fracture morphology of the weld after the tensile test was observed using the SEM.	1
As shown in , the specimens exhibit a typical dendritic morphology. The region between the two adjacent secondary dendrite arms is referred to as the interdendritic region. Precipitates can be observed in both the interdendritic regions and at the dendritic boundaries in the as-welded specimen (a). Comparing a–d, there are no noticeable changes in the dendritic morphology of the welds after PWHT.	0
At a higher magnification, the precipitates in the interdendritic regions of the as-welded specimen exhibit two different morphologies: a massive eutectic-like one and a nano-sized granular one (a). The finer size of the latter implies that their formation results from a sluggish solid-state reaction. In other words, they are probably formed during the cooling stage of the welding process, and the element segregation near the phase interface of the eutectic-like precipitates would have provided the necessary elements for their formation. With the increase in the PWHT temperature, the quantity of nano-sized precipitates decreases gradually, as shown in b–d. When the PWHT temperature reaches 950 °C, the nano-sized precipitates completely disappear.  shows the sizes of the eutectic M6C carbides in the interdendritic regions of the welds after the PWHT. Here, the size of the eutectic M6C carbides is defined as their average area. At least five different SEM images with a 6000-fold magnification were used to determine the size of the eutectic M6C carbides. The eutectic-like M6C carbides grow during the PWHT, and their size increases with the increase in the PWHT temperature.	0
a shows the XRD spectra of the precipitates extracted from the welds before and after PWHT. The M2C and M6C carbides coexist in the as-welded specimens. In addition, the relative quantity of the M6C carbides increases with the increase in the PWHT temperature. When the PWHT temperature increases to 950 °C, only M6C carbides can be detected in the XRD spectrum, indicating the instability of M2C at this temperature. A comparison of the results, shown in a, helps confirm that the eutectic-like precipitates are M6C carbides, whereas the nano-sized ones are M2C carbides.	0
It is noteworthy that the XRD peak position (2θ) of the M6C carbides in the specimens shifts, indicating a change in the lattice parameter of the M6C carbides because of the PWHT. The lattice parameter of the M6C carbides in the specimens before and after PWHT was calculated from the characteristic peaks by applying the Nelson–Riley function [,]. As shown in b, the intercept points on the y-axis indicate the lattice parameters of the precipitates. The lattice parameter of the M6C carbides decreases with the increase in the PWHT temperature.	0
 shows the TEM images of the M2C and M6C carbides in the welds before and after PWHT. The welds consist of a γ matrix and a significant amount of precipitates in the matrix. Two types of precipitates are observed in the as-welded specimens (a and b): a massive eutectic-like precipitate and a nano-sized granular one. This is consistent with the SEM results (a). The insets of a and b show the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns of the two types of precipitates distributed in the interdendritic regions of the as-welded specimens; these can be indexed to an M6C phase with an FCC structure and an M2C phase with an HCP structure. The lattice parameter of the M6C phase was determined to be ˜11.2 Å and those of the M2C phase to be 3.0 Å for a and 4.9 Å for c. Similar results are obtained for the welds with PWHT at 780 °C (c and d) and 870 °C (e and f). When the PWHT temperature increases to 950 °C, only the massive eutectic-like precipitates can be observed (g). The SAED patterns confirm that these are M6C carbides, once again proving that the nano-sized M2C carbides completely disappear during the PWHT at 950 °C. The M6C carbides in the as-welded specimen are composed of Ni, Mo, Cr, Fe, Si, and C, whereas the M2C carbides contain similar elements except for Si ().	0
 shows the progressive morphological change in the precipitates at the dendritic boundaries before and after the PWHT. Some short rod-like particles are discontinuously precipitated at the dendritic boundaries in the as-welded specimen (a). These dendritic boundary precipitates exhibit a coarse and continuous morphology after the PWHT. The higher the PWHT temperature, the larger the precipitates (b–d).  shows the size and length ratio of the dendritic boundary precipitates. Here, the size of the rod-like precipitates at a dendritic boundary is defined as the average diameter (along a direction perpendicular to the dendritic boundary) of the rod-like precipitates, whereas the length ratio is defined as the ratio of the total length (along a direction parallel to the dendritic boundary) of all the rod-like precipitates at the dendritic boundary to the length of this dendritic boundary. The size of the dendritic boundary precipitates increases from ˜82 nm to ˜300 nm, whereas their length ratio increases from 28% to 86% with the increase in the PWHT temperature. In particular, when the PWHT temperature reaches 950 °C, the size and length ratio of the dendritic boundary precipitates are equivalent to 366% and 307% of those of the dendritic boundary precipitates in the as-welded specimen, respectively. The precipitates at the dendritic boundaries in the welds coarsen after the PWHT. The dendritic boundary precipitates were identified as M6C carbides, and  shows the typical results.	0
 shows the Vickers micro-hardness values of the welds before and after the PWHT. The as-welded specimen exhibits the highest hardness, whereas the micro-hardness of the welds after PWHT decreases remarkably with the increase in the PWHT temperature.	0
 shows the results of the tensile properties of the welds before and after the PWHT at 650 °C. The yield strength, ultimate tensile strength, and elongation of the as-welded specimen are 395 MPa, 517 MPa, and 20.9%, respectively. With the increase in the PWHT temperature, the plasticity of the weld is improved, and the yield strength decreases dramatically, whereas the ultimate tensile strength slightly increases. The weld after the PWHT at 950 °C exhibits the lowest yield strength (299 MPa) and highest elongation (34%). In particular, the elongation of the weld increases by 63% after the PWHT at 950 °C for 6 h, compared with the as-welded specimen (a). The work hardening rate (Θ) can be defined as [,]:where σ and ε are the true stress and true strain, respectively. The work hardening rate slightly increases with the increase in the PWHT temperature (c).	0
The tensile test specimens fracture along their dendritic boundaries (). The fractured surfaces indicate a mixed ductile–brittle facture mode. Because the plastic deformation of the matrix is remarkable during fracturing, the tear ridge of the dimple is very sharp. The tear ridges on the fracture surface of the as-welded specimen (a) are shorter than those on the fracture surface of the welds after PWHT (b–d). The fracture surface of the as-welded specimen contains a few shallow and large dimples (a), whereas some deep and small dimples are observed on the fracture surfaces of the welds after PWHT. In addition, the dimples on the fracture surface become deeper and smaller with the increase in the PWHT temperature. These results confirm that the PWHT improved the plasticity of the welds.	0
 show massive eutectic-like M6C carbides in the interdendritic zone. The phase diagram of a GH3535 alloy was calculated using the Thermo-Calc Program in our previous study, in which the precipitation temperature of the eutectic-like M6C carbides was slightly higher than the solidus temperature []. This result indicates the formation of M6C carbides as the stable phase toward the end of solidification from a thermodynamic perspective. It has been reported that the residual liquid in the interdendritic zone of nickel-based alloys is rich in Mo and Si but lack Ni and Fe during the continuous solidification, because of the difference in the partition coefficients of these elements [,]. The enrichment of C has also been observed in the interdendritic zone of a fiber laser-welded GH3535 alloy [,]. The simultaneous enrichment of Mo, Si, and C is believed to promote the formation of eutectic-like M6C carbides in the interdendritic zone in the present case. Although the metastable M2C carbides were not labeled in the obtained equilibrium phase diagram, their coexistence with the M6C carbides has been confirmed in nonequilibrium as-cast GH3535 alloys [,]. In the present study, it can be deduced that there exists a concentration gradient of Mo and C atoms around the eutectic-like M6C carbides, which is beneficial to the formation of M2C carbides. The nano-scale size of the M2C carbides suggests that they are precipitated in the intermediate temperature from the solid matrix during the cooling stage of the welding process.	0
As shown in , the nano-sized M2C carbides are found to dissolve after the PWHT and decrease in number with the increase in the PWHT temperature, indicating their instability. It has been reported that M2C carbides are formed at the grain boundaries in wrought GH3535 alloys at the initial stage of thermal exposure ranging from 700 to 800 °C and then re-dissolve with longer thermal exposure []. The M2C carbides are characterized by their metastability or instability above 700 °C in this alloy. A first-principles calculation study gave a possible explanation that the Hexa-MoCrC system is relatively more unstable than Hexa-Mo2C one because of the existence of Cr []. As shown in , the M2C carbides in the GH3535 alloy contain ˜10 at. % Cr. On the other hand, the PWHT could weaken or even eliminate the concentration gradient of the Mo and C atoms around the eutectic-like M6C carbides. The local chemical composition near the phase interfaces tends to approach the nominal composition of this alloy; this cannot rule out the existence of M2C carbides as predicted by the phase diagram calculation.	0
From , the quantities of both eutectic-like M6C carbides and dendritic boundary ones increase with the increase in the PWHT temperature. The nonequilibrium segregations of Mo, Si, and C atoms in the interdendritic regions, which are formed during the solidification, promote the coarsening of the eutectic-like M6C carbides, and their equilibrium segregation is responsible for the formation of M6C carbides at the dendritic boundaries during the PWHT. In addition, the nano-sized M2C carbides are dissolved into the matrix and release additional Mo and C atoms, which diffuse into the interdendritic regions and dendritic boundaries to support the coarsening of the M6C carbides. The higher the PWHT temperature, the more the amount of carbide-forming elements released and the more the amount of M6C carbides in the interdendritic regions and dendritic boundaries.	0
The micro-hardness is proportional to the yield strength of the welds, which decreases with the increase in the PWHT temperature. The relative quantity of the nano-sized M2C carbides decreases, ultimately disappearing when the PWHT temperature increases to 950 °C, as shown in . These fine carbides, acting as the dispersion strengthening particles in the weld metal, are the main factors that help enhance the hardness and strength of the weld []. Thus, the dissolution of the nano-sized M2C carbides during the PWHT is responsible for the decrease in the micro-hardness and yield strength.  shows the dislocation configurations of the Hastelloy N superalloy welds before and after the PWHT. Compared with the as-welded specimen (a), the dislocations in the welds after PWHT (b–d) are fewer. The dense pre-existing dislocation network would suppress their movement in the FCC matrix during the deformation process (tensile or hardness tests), which contributes to the higher yield strength and hardness. Such effects, called strain strengthening, would weaken when these dislocations disappear during the PWHT. Thus, it can be concluded that the dissolution of the nano-sized M2C carbides and the annihilation of the dislocations during the PWHT lead to a decrease in the yield strength and hardness. As shown in , the work hardening rate slightly increases with the increase in the PWHT temperature. The work hardening rate decreases with the progress of the deformation process in all the four specimens. The as-welded specimen can be considered a pre-deformed one because of the restrained welding stress; this specimen is expected to possess a lower work hardening rate. As another result of carbide dissolution and dislocation annihilation, the weld can accommodate more amount of deformation before the nucleation of the cracks at the dendritic boundaries. On the other hand, the M6C carbides discontinuously overspread along the dendritic boundaries and exhibit a coarse and continuous morphology with the increase in the PWHT temperature (). The carbides precipitated at the grain boundaries can prevent grain boundary sliding and impede crack propagation, thus improving the strength and ductility of the alloy []. This in turn improves the elongation and tensile strength with the increase in the PWHT temperature. The size and quantity of the M6C carbides precipitated at the dendritic boundaries in the welds during the PWHT increase, thus improving the tensile strength and elongation of the welds.	0
The effects of PWHT on the microstructure and mechanical properties of Hastelloy N superalloy welds were studied. The following are the main conclusions of this study:	0
The microstructure of the as-welded specimen is composed of eutectic-like M6C carbides surrounded by nano-sized M2C carbides in the interdendritic regions, whereas some finer M6C carbides precipitate at the dendritic boundaries.	0
The quantity of nano-sized M2C carbides in the interdendritic regions decreases with the increase in the PWHT temperature. When the PWHT temperature reaches 950 °C, the nano-sized M2C carbides completely disappear.	0
The M6C carbides at the dendritic boundaries grow during the PWHT. The higher the PWHT temperature, the larger the M6C carbides.	0
The micro-hardness and yield strength decrease because of the dissolution of the nano-sized M2C carbides and the annihilation of the dislocations during the PWHT, whereas the tensile strength and elongation increase because the size and quantity of the M6C carbides precipitated at the dendritic boundaries increase during the PWHT.	0
This work is supported by the  (2017YFA0402800, 2016YFB0700404), the  (Grant No. 17ZR1436700),  (Grant Nos. 51371188, 51671122, 5161154, 51601213, and 51501216),  (Grant Nos. XDA02004210, XDA02004220 and XDA02020400) and  (Grant No. 16YF1414300),  (201650).	0
Designed a Cu containing FeMnCoCrSi high entropy alloy for improved fatigue strength.	0
Ultrafine grained microstructure in combination with localized martensitic transformation enable extremely high fatigue strength.	0
Ultrafine grained microstructure delays crack initiation whereas localized transformation within crack plastic zone delayed crack propagation through controlled (h.c.p.) formation.	0
Fatigue is known as a damage accumulation process that results in catastrophic failure of structural materials, and that eventually threatens human safety. Therefore, designing fatigue-resistant materials to counteract or at least to mitigate compromises to human safety is imperative. Classically, total fatigue life has been improved by controlling microstructure to increase fatigue crack initiation life and to reduce the crack propagation rate . Refinement of the grain size results in a higher resistance to crack initiation, thereby improving fatigue initiation life. Through this approach, high cycle fatigue property is enhanced. However, ultrafine grained materials are known to exhibit higher crack growth rate, which results in lower fatigue propagation life, and ultimately results in poor response at higher stress amplitude . To overcome this significant deficiency, additional mechanisms can be used to arrest or retard crack propagation by localized work hardening (WH) activity within the crack tip plastic zone . Koyama et al.  reported that a bone-like laminated microstructure in a metastable steel could assist in arresting fatigue crack growth by activating roughness-induced crack termination and transformation-induced crack termination micro-mechanisms and ultimately improving the alloy's fatigue property. Similarly, Ni-based superalloys show excellent fatigue property at high temperature owing to reduced grain size and delayed crack growth rate by coarsened γ″, β, γ′ precipitates .	0
Recently, materials scientists have diverted away from the conventional alloy design strategy leading to a new class of materials, which are termed as high entropy alloys (HEAs), or complex concentrated alloys (CCAs) . The conventional alloy design approach was to achieve a specific material property by interchanging the alloying element in the principle alloying element. Adding different elements alters materials’ stacking fault energy, and eventually makes it susceptible to sensitive phase stability with strain and temperature that alters the WH behavior of an alloy .	0
Microstructural features such as dislocations, twins, stacking faults, dispersoids and precipitates can provide paths for crack nucleation and propagation via their mutual interaction with the matrix under cyclic loading leading to fatigue failure. However, HEA design strategy provides abundant compositional space for either suppressing or eliminating these detrimental microstructural features for better fatigue properties. Stacking fault energy can be varied substantially by varying the mixing entropy (i.e. by changing the alloy chemistry) of the FCC matrix which allows activation of various deformation micro-mechanisms within the crack tip plastic zone, for example, twinning  and/or transformation . When triggered, these mechanisms dissipate the energy available for crack growth, resulting in slower crack growth rate. Also, they locally strengthened the material through creation of additional interfaces. Few reports till date have studied and proved excellent fatigue properties of HEAs/CCAs, due to the formation of nanotwins near the crack , as well as by enhancing crack path tortuosity through hierarchically structured secondary phases . Interestingly, combining twinning induced plasticity (TWIP)/transformation induced plasticity (TRIP) with conventional slip in HEAs led to enhanced WH behavior where uniform elongation was augmented with the assistance of strain-induced γ (f.c.c.)→ɛ (h.c.p.) transformation. The formation of α′ martensite and ɛ-martensite are interdependent phenomena. However, their stability is dictated by the presence of certain alloying elements. For example, presence of Mn and Ni in austenite matrix. As observed in TRIP stainless steels with high fraction of Ni than Mn, α′ martensite forms frequently whereas Ni-free TRIP steels with low, medium and high Mn content always showed preferential ɛ formation . Our recent works on design of microstructurally flexible HEAs based on metastability engineering by addition of Si in FeMnCoCr matrix showed adaptive phase stability of thermodynamically unstable ɛ phase (or stable γ phase), depending on alloy chemistry and processing conditions . Thermodynamic simulations using ThermoCalc with the TCHEA2 database suggest that Si addition significantly alters the predicted γ phase stability and subsequent experimental results validated this by showing improved mechanical properties via extensive TRIP effect . Due to strain induced transformation, we proved that the crack tip plastic zone altered WH locally, and improved the material's ability to compensate accumulated energy from fatigue damage .	0
Here we propose a combined alloy design and microstructural engineering strategy aimed at attaining superior fatigue performance. The present strategy promotes the desired response by resistance to the fatigue crack: (1) initiation by reducing grain size to oppose activation of lattice dislocations, and (2) propagation resistance by additional energy absorption due to strain-induced transformation in the plastic zone ahead of the crack tip. This aim was realized by the design of FeMnCoCrSi HEA having minor addition of Cu. This aim was realized by the design of FeMnCoCrSi HEA having minor addition of Cu. Minor addition of Cu makes the γ matrix more stable if dissolved in solid solution or can destabilize it if it forms clusters at the grain boundaries due to lack of solubility . Thus, we used FSP as a microstructural engineering route since severe shear driven transport of elements during FSP can dissolve immiscible Cu in FeMnCoCrSi matrix thereby stabilizing the γ matrix.	0
The Fe38.5Mn20Co20Cr15Si5Cu1.5 (henceforth designated as Cu HEA) was produced by a vacuum induction melting in a cold-copper crucible backfilled with argon to 1atm. The nominal composition of Cu-HEA is Fe38.5Mn20Co20Cr15Si5Cu1.5 (at.%), with a final dimension of the cast material 250mm×80mm×10mm. The cast material was friction stir processed with a W-Re tool using the parameters listed in . The processing tool had a shoulder diameter of 12mm with a tapered pin. The root diameter, pin diameter, and length of the tool were 7.5mm, 6mm, and 3.5mm, respectively.	1
Detailed microstructural analysis was carried out with back-scattered electron microscopy (BSE) using FEI Nova NanoSEM230. EBSD scans were done using orientation imaging microscopy (OIM) on FEI Nova NanoSEM230 to reveal the grain size and distribution and phase with 20kV accelerating voltage and 6.1nA current with step size 75nm. Phases in the microstructure as presented were further confirmed with X-Ray diffraction (XRD) measurements using RIGAKU X-ray equipment, with Cu Kα radiation operated at 40kV and 30mA. To ensure homogeneity in the gage, mini tensile and fatigue samples were obtained from the nugget region 1mm below the processed top surface. Mini tensile and fatigue samples were machined using a computer numerical control machine. The tensile samples with gage length ∼5mm, width ∼1.2mm, and thickness ∼1.1mm were tested at room temperature using a computer-controlled mini-tensile machine at an initial strain rate of 10−3s−1. Fully reversed (R=−1) bending fatigue tests were performed with a custom-made tabletop fatigue testing machine at 20Hz. Sample dimensions and machine details are given in . Tensile and fatigue samples were polished with SiC papers to 1200 grit, and final polishing with 1μm diamond suspension. Fatigue and microscopy samples were further polished with 0.05 and 0.02μm colloidal silica suspensions.	1
Besides grain refinement, friction stir processing (FSP) is a unique high-temperature severe deformation process wherein shear-driven transport of elements can dissolve immiscible elements into solid solution , and hence the expectation is that FSP could dissolve the immiscible Cu in the Fe-Mn-Co-Cr-Si matrix. Dissolution of Cu stabilizes the γ phase. The effect of Cu addition on grain and phase evolution in as-cast as well as as-FSP condition has been captured in . a1 shows an electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) inverse pole figure (IPF) map of the as-cast condition, where coarse grains with lath features were observed. a3 confirms the existence of ∼15% ɛ phase. Knowing that FSP is a path to achieve ultrafine grain in alloys , two overlapping runs with tool rotational rate of 100RPM were used. This resulted not only in extreme grain refinement (0.77±0.35μm) (b) but also in a γ phase dominant microstructure (c1 and c3). Further, as expected, atom probe tomography confirmed homogeneous distribution of Cu in solid solution upon FSP without clustering or solute partitioning (d). Dissolution of Cu in solid solution made the γ matrix more stable and strong; a substantial contribution by solid solution strengthening. γ matrix stability was further confirmed by XRD showing stronger and more distinct peaks for the γ phase than the ɛ phase in both as-cast and as-FSP conditions (a2 and c2).	0
The fatigue property of an alloy is closely related to its tensile response; hence, a inset shows the engineering and true stress–strain curve for Cu-HEA in the as-FSP condition. The designed alloy has shown yield strength (YS) of ∼850MPa, ultimate tensile strength (UTS) of ∼1126MPa, and total elongation of ∼42% (a). Enhanced YS is an outcome of severe grain refinement, whereas increased UTS and ductility are attributed to a higher work hardenability . The difference in the area under the red and blue curves hints to the work hardenability of Cu-HEA. The larger grain boundary area is expected to exert higher back stress for the ɛ plate to grow against the grain boundaries and hence causes local strain mismatch during deformation induced γ→ɛ transformation. As a result, this local grain boundary/ɛ plate interface activity triggers sustained yet slower WH via TRIP, and gives rise to UTS of ∼1126MPa and total elongation of ∼42%. Further, excellent work hardenability could also alter the cyclic loading response of the Cu-HEA in spite of having ultrafine grain (UFG) size by manipulating the crack initiation and propagation behavior locally.	1
Typical UFG materials, with relatively increased numbers of grain boundaries, exhibit poor fatigue life in the low cycle fatigue (LCF) regime owing to rapid energy dissipation through favored crack propagation along these grain boundaries. Conversely, in the high cycle fatigue (HCF) regime, the fatigue endurance limit of UFG materials is enhanced considerably by grain refinement owing to the delay in fatigue crack initiation life under low stress amplitude . The significance of the current study is that our experimental results on HCF performance of Cu-HEA defy the conventional expectation by exhibiting high fatigue endurance limit of ∼700MPa (0.62UTS) despite its UFG condition (b). Hence, this alloy presents an attractive combination of its tensile strength, inherent to UFG materials, as well as promising HCF behavior. b shows the stress amplitude (S)–number of cycles (N) curve from fully reversible (R=−1) bending fatigue testing. Fatigue tests were carried out at several stress levels, stress amplitude ranging from 637MPa (0.57UTS)–840MPa (0.75UTS), to determine an S–N curve. The extraordinary fatigue strength of Cu-HEA is not only higher than UFG materials but also outperforms most of the fatigue-resistant materials like commercial Ti alloys and Ni-based superalloys and recently reported HEAs (b) . In summary, the flexibility-based alloy design of Cu-HEA displayed a fatigue runout stress amplitude (700MPa) with a normalized fatigue ratio of 0.62UTS. A detailed, albeit brief, investigation of fatigue failure in terms of crack initiation and propagation follows.	0
To understand crack initiation and its propagation path, a microstructural investigation of an interrupted specimen was carried out. A fatigue test was interrupted after 114,710 cycles at 717MPa (0.64UTS) with an indication of an instant decrease of ∼2% on one side of the stress amplitude. As the crack starts from one surface, bending stress on that surface reduces, while that of the other surface remains constant . An overall fatigue crack path is shown in a. BSE and EBSD phase maps of different regions from the crack tip confirm transformation-induced plastic accommodation within the crack plastic zone (b and b1–3). A lower magnification scan confirmed evidence of TRIP as observed by the significantly higher volume fraction of ɛ phase within the crack tip plastic zone (red region in b1–3). As γ→ɛ transformation is associated with strain mismatch between these phases, it results in alteration of localized WH behavior, which enables local enhancement of deformation accommodation at the crack tip. Important to note is that the amount of stress required to trigger the TRIP effect depends on the stability of γ phase. As a result, refined and strong γ resists ɛ formation until higher stress is reached . Once the crack is initiated, it forms a plastic zone at the crack tip and locally alters stress distribution. Stress concentration within the crack plastic zone reaches stress levels sufficient to trigger the TRIP effect. However, stability of the γ phase is confirmed by the fact that in the absence of stress concentration, transformation is not activated outside of the plastic zone (b1–3 and d). This is confirmed by the almost complete γ microstructure (green) away from the crack tip plastic zone (b2) and the higher fraction of the ɛ phase (red) within certain distance from the crack tip (b1,3). Additionally, micro-crack branching (c) indicates increased energy dissipation by the near perpendicular propagation relative to the main crack path and therefore helps to avoid conventional abrupt fatigue failure.	1
Typically, less fatigue-resistant materials are prone to rapid fatigue failure due to a shorter path for crack propagation. However, extensive research has been carried out to engineer the crack propagation paths by increasing the mean free path for crack movement. Conventionally this has been achieved by local WH activity to accommodate strain mismatch between either two phases or matrix and dispersoids, thereby altering the mean free path for crack propagation. This phenomenon is termed “crack retardation.” The present work confirmed that the combination of an ultrafine grain and metastable alloy achieved similar crack retardation (a) owing to the localized γ→ɛ transformation (b and b1) within the crack tip plastic zone (a). This transformation-induced crack retardation triggers micro-crack growth away from the main path, extends the main crack path and subsequently delays the failure. However, to sustain this localized WH activity, dynamic load transfer between the γ and ɛ phases results from straining even during cyclic loading . Extensive cyclic plastic deformation results in additional energy dissipation during crack growth stage. The localized Kernel average misorientation (KAM) distribution suggests reasonable strain accommodation occurred within the plastic zone in the newly-formed ɛ phase, and confirms active involvement of the ɛ phase in strain accommodation with deformation twinning , as confirmed by the higher KAM values in the ɛ phase (highlighted by circles in c and c1–2). Twinning dependent on chemistry as well as stress. It is claimed that twinning induced plasticity is mainly seen at later stages of plastic deformation (near UTS) due to higher level of stress required for re-orienting the γ f.c.c. matrix. Moreover, twinning also led to ɛ formation in metastable γ matrix because of higher stability of intrinsic stacking faults . Hence, the designed alloy has relatively more metastable matrix than conventional TRIP/TWIP steels and hence showed ɛ formation. In short, effective plasticity within the ɛ phase via deformation twinning, in addition to TRIP, contributed to a more sustained localized WH activity and thus enabled deviation in the crack propagation path by formation of micro-cracks, which ultimately resists fatigue failure.	0
In summary, conventional materials exhibit low resistance to crack initiation and propagation rates because of limited energy dissipation during these stages. Ultrafine grained materials show delayed crack initiation but faster propagation rates along grain boundaries under high cycle fatigue regime. However, these trends were overcome in the present work by combining ultrafine grain microstructure with metastable matrix, Cu-HEA not only showed delayed crack initiation but also delayed crack propagation in the high cycle fatigue regime. This unconventional fatigue response is attributed to the controlled TRIP effect within the crack plastic zone and effective strain accommodation by the newly-formed ɛ phase by slip and twinning.	0
K.L., S.S.N., M.F., S.S., R.S.M. designed the research; K.L. S.S.N., M.F. and S.S. processed and characterized the alloy; K.L., S.S.N., M.F., S.S., and R.S.M. analyzed the results; K.L., S.S.N. and R.S.M. drafted the manuscript. All authors discussed the results and contributed to the final manuscript.	0
The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study.	0
Authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the  through grant # 1435810. The authors are thankful to the Center for Advanced Research and Technology for providing access to the microscopy facilities at the University of North Texas.	0
A multilayer coating composed of alternating Ni+CrAlYSiHfN and AlxN layers was prepared by reactive sputtering.	0
This multilayer coating exhibited better oxidation resistance than the NiCrAlYSiHf coating at 1050°C and 1100°C.	0
The micro-hardness of the multilayer coating is higher than that of the NiCrAlYSiHf coating.	0
Superalloys used in gas turbines possess attractive mechanical properties such as high temperature tensile strength, creep and fatigue lifetime, which are achieved at the expense of oxidation resistance . The oxidation resistance, therefore, is provided by protective coatings . The traditional protective coatings, such as β-NiAl and MCrAlY (M=Ni, Co, or combinations), derive their protectiveness at high temperatures in oxidizing atmosphere by forming continuous and intact thermally grown oxide (TGO) scales on the surfaces . However, the TGO is inclined to peel off during cooling stages because large thermal stresses may be generated due to large mismatch of coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) between coating and TGO . So, it is important to improve the adherence of TGO to the coatings.	0
Adding reactive elements, such as Y and Hf, into the coatings is the most popular method to improve the bonding strength of TGO to coatings . Another well-known method is nanocrystallization by magnetron sputtering , thermal spraying using nanocrystalline feedstock  and surface sand blasting . The mechanism for the improved TGO adhesion to the nanocrystalline coatings is attributed to that, as pointed out by Wang , (1) reducing thermal stresses, (2) relieving stresses by enhancing plastic deformation of TGO and coating, and (3) increasing the bonding between TGO and coatings due to the formation of oxide intrusions into the substrate grain boundaries, which act as pegs anchoring TGO to coating. Because magnetron sputtering is an atom deposition process at temperatures far below melting point, the sputtered coatings usually have uniform elemental distribution which leads to the formation of a single phase coating. For example, the as-sputtered Ni-base superalloy M951 coating did not contain γ′-Ni3Al . This feature may help preventing formation of less-protective oxides on low-Al or Al-free grains, such as γ′ or carbide.	0
A recently developed low expansion Ni+CrAlYSiHfN nanocomposite coating might be a promising option for improving TGO spallation resistance . The Ni+CrAlYSiHfN coating comprises metallic nanocrystalline γ-Ni embedded with ceramic precipitates of AlN and CrN, so its CTE is greater than that of the TGO and smaller than that of β-NiAl and MCrAlY. For a coating of which the volume fractions of γ-Ni, CrN and AlN are 62, 12 and 26 vol.%, respectively, the estimated CTE using the Turner equation is ∼12.5×10−6 (K−1), closer to that of α-Al2O3. The growth rates of exclusive α-Al2O3 scales on the Ni+CrAlYSiN nanocomposite coatings was only half of those on the metallic NiCrAlYSi coating during cyclic oxidation tests at 1000°C. Most importantly, TGO spallation occurred only on the NiCrAlYSi coating .	0
For the purposes of increasing the lifetime or elevating the operation temperature of the coating, adding more Al into the coating is necessary. However, the total volume fractions of AlN and CrN in the nanocomposite coating should be less than that of γ-Ni. The above-mentioned nanocomposite coatings are metal matrix composites. They were able to be resistant against thermal shock, because the metallic matrix provided high fracture toughness and proper coefficient of thermal expansion. When the volume fraction of nitride is greater than that of γ-Ni, the nanocomposite coating will be changed to a nitride-based composite from γ-Ni-based one, and behave like a ceramic coating. That is, the CTE of the coating will become too smaller as compared to that of the superalloy substrate, therefore the thermal stresses generated in the coating itself during cooling may become great enough to lead to spallation of the coating.	0
To overcome this difficulty, a Ni+CrAlYSiHfN/AlN multilayer coating is proposed in the present work. The stresses in a film can be relieved by substrate/coating creep at high temperature . A multilayer coating that is composed of layers with nanocrystalline microstructures has high creep rates at high temperatures, because creep is dependent upon diffusivity while nanocrystalline materials have large density of grain boundaries which provide fast diffusion paths. Therefore adding many nano-scale AlN layers into a Ni+CrAlYSiHfN nanocomposite coating may avoid spallation of the nanocomposite coating while being able to increase total Al concentration in the coating. To implement this idea, a multi-layered coating with alternating Ni+CrAlYSiHfN cermet layers and AlN ones will be prepared by magnetron sputtering. The thickness of each layer was controlled to be several hundred nanometers. The microstructure, micro-hardness and oxidation behavior of the multilayer coatings will be examined.	0
The multilayer coating was sputtered onto a second generation Ni-base single crystal superalloy René N5, with nominal composition of Ni—7Cr—6.2 Al—7.5Co—6.5 Ta—5 W—1.5 Mo—3 Re—0.15Hf. The superalloy specimens were cut into dimensions of Φ16mm×2.5mm, ground to 2000 grit SiC paper, polished with diamond paste (2.5μm), and then ultrasonically cleaned in ethanol and acetone.	1
The multilayer coatings were prepared by reactive magnetron sputtering deposition, using a NiCrAlYHfSi target and an Al one (in 99.99wt.% purity). The NiCrAlYHfSi target was machined from an ingot with chemical compositions of Ni—25Cr—10Al—0.5Y—0.5Si—0.5Hf (in wt.%). The NiCrAlYHfSi and Al targets were set face-to-face, and connected to a middle-frequency power supply. The specimens were located at the middle of two targets. Prior to the coating deposition, the vacuum chamber was evacuated to a base vacuum below 6.0×10−3Pa. Firstly, a bond layer of NiCrAlYHfSi with thickness of 1μm was deposited on the substrate in Ar with partial pressure of 0.2Pa. Then alternate Ni+CrAlYSiHfN cermet and AlN layers were deposited in a gas mixture of Ar and N2 (both in 99.99% purity), respectively. Finally, a topmost layer of mixed Ni+CrAlYSiHfN and AlN was prepared by fast rotating the specimens. The detailed deposition parameters are presented in . The sputtering power was set at 2kW, and the deposition time for each layer and for the whole coating was 2min and 240min, respectively. Proper thickness for each layer is important. The neighboring AlN/cermet layers may react with each other during testing at high temperatures, and then nitride may congregate. So, the layers should be thick enough so as to prevent the coating from transforming into a nitride-based cermet coating. On the other hand, the nitride layers should be thin enough so as to get rid of spallation due to large thermal stresses during thermal shock. Experimental tests revealed that it is proper that the thickness of each nitride layer is controlled in the range from 1/4 to 1/2μm. In this work, it is about 0.3μm.	1
For comparison, a metallic NiCrAlYHfSi coating, about 45μm thick, was prepared by DC magnetron sputtering on René N5. The detailed deposition parameters are presented in . For the convenience of discussion, the Ni+CrAlYSiHfN/AlN multilayer coating is denoted the multilayer coating.	1
Prior to oxidation tests, all the coated samples were annealed in a sealed quartz vacuum tube at 1000°C for 1h. The purpose of vacuum annealing is to stabilize the microstructure and then to avoid unpredicted detrimental effects of any possible phase transformation. Discontinuous oxidation tests of coated samples were conducted in static air at 1050°C and 1100°C for 100h. Three parallel samples were arranged to ensure experimental accuracy and reproducibility in each test. The specimens were taken out of the furnace at various intervals for mass measurement. The total mass of each specimen together with the crucible was recorded using a micro-balance with a sensitivity of 10−5g.	1
The micro-hardness of the two coatings in as-prepared and annealed status was measured. Both coated specimens were sealed into a quartz vacuum tube and kept at 1000°C for different times in a muffle furnace. Then the Vickers micro-hardness of these coatings was measured using a Buehler Micro-indenter with a load of 50mg. The maximum indentation depth was determined to be ≤1/10 of the coating thickness, thereby excluding the effect of substrate deformation.	1
The crystalline phases of the coatings and oxides were identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Cu Kα1). Microstructure and elemental compositions of the coatings and oxidation products were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) equipped with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectrum (EDS). STEM samples in cross-section, both as-deposited and oxidized coatings, were observed by a Jeol JEM 2010F transmission electron microscopy (TEM) equipped with a Tracor EDS.	1
a shows the cross-sectional backscattered electron of the as-deposited multilayer. The total thickness of the multilayer coating was about 40μm. The STEM bright field image (b) shows that the multilayer coating consisted of alternating brighter and darker layers. The brighter layers in STEM bright field image, which correspond to the darker layers in BSE image, were about 400nm thick while the darker layers were about 300nm (b). The selected area electron diffraction (SAD) rings for the bright layer as shown in c indicate that they were composed of ceramic hcp-AlN and metallic Al. The dark layers were Ni+CrAlYSiHfN, and comprised γ-Ni matrix embedded with nanocrystalline hcp-AlN and CrN grains, according to our previous work .	0
d shows the BSE morphology of the as-deposited NiCrAlYHfSi coating, indicating the NiCrAlYHfSi coating was intact and adherent. The thickness of the coating was about 45μm. According to the SAD results (e), the coating was mainly composed of fine-grained γ′-Ni3Al and α-Cr.	0
The multilayer coating after annealing was composted of β-NiAl and hcp-AlN, according to XRD analysis as shown in . Neither fcc-Al nor Cr-containing phase was detected by XRD. It is possible that β-NiAl was formed due to the reaction between the metallic Al in the AlN layers and the γ-Ni grains in the Ni+CrAlYSiHfN layers. The reaction between CrN and Al at high temperature, which forms AlN and Cr, is also thermodynamically favored . According to Al–Cr–Ni equilibrium ternary phase diagram , the maximum solubility of Cr in β-NiAl is about 10wt.% at 1000°C. So, part of Cr may be solid dissolved in β-NiAl. Besides, XRD is not able to distinguish α-Cr from β-NiAl. Both are of body centered cubic, and all the diffraction peaks of α-Cr are overlapped by β-NiAl. Trace amount of α-Al2O3 was detected, indicating surface oxidation occurred during annealing because the oxygen partial pressure in the quartz vacuum cube is not low enough to prevent oxidation.	0
SEM observation (not shown here) indicated that the surface of the multilayer coating kept smooth after vacuum annealing at 1000°C for 1h, and no macro-holes and bulges were founded.  exhibits cross-sectional BSE images of the multilayer coating after annealing. The interfaces between the layers became less smooth, possibly because interface reactions occurred which led to formation of β-NiAl. The average chemical composition of the multilayer coating was Ni—37 Al—11Cr—23N (in at.%) by EDS. Assuming all N is bound in AlN, the remains of the coating of the metallic phase is about Ni-20.4Cr-25.9Al in at.% or Ni—21.6Cr—14.2Al in wt.%, which is located in the γ′+β zone. The coating was possibly non-equilibrium AlN+β-NiAl(Cr), since γ′ and Cr-containing phase were not detected by XRD. Given the density of AlN as 3.26g/cm3 and that of β-NiAl(Cr) as 8.9g/cm3, the volume fractions of AlN and β-NiAl(Cr) in the multilayer coating are estimated to be about 49.25% and 50.75%. That is, the volume fraction of the nitride is slightly lower than that of the metallic phase. The thickness ratio of the AlN layers and the cermet ones is 3:4. Therefore, the volume percent of AlN and β-NiAl(Cr) in the cermet layers are estimated to be about 4.48% and 95.52%, respectively. Beneath the multilayer coating, an interdiffusion zone (IDZ) with precipitates rich in refractory elements, about 7μm thick, was formed during vacuum annealing at 1000°C.	0
 presents the oxidation kinetic curves for the NiCrAlYHfSi and multilayer coatings at 1050°C and 1100°C, respectively. At both temperatures, for the first 5h of oxidation, the multilayer coating exhibited higher mass gains than the NiCrAlYHfSi coating. As the oxidation time was prolonged, the mass gains of the multilayer coating increased slightly while those of the NiCrAlYHfSi coating increased faster. The total mass gains of the multilayer coatings after 100h oxidation at 1050°C and 1100°C were about 3/4 and 2/3 of those of the NiCrAlYHfSi coatings, respectively.	0
 shows the XRD patterns of the multilayer and NiCrAlYHfSi coating after oxidation at 1050°C for 20h and 100h. The oxidation product of the multilayer coating was a mixture of α-Al2O3 and θ-Al2O3 after 20h of oxidation. As the oxidation proceeds to 100h, only α-Al2O3 was detected, indicating the θ- to α-Al2O3 phase transformation finished. The phases of the multilayer coating after 20h were β-NiAl, hcp-AlN, γ′-Ni3Al and Cr2Ni3. As the oxidation prolonged to 100h, the γ′-Ni3Al diffraction peak became stronger while the β-NiAl peak counts changed by the opposite way and Cr2Ni3 disappeared.	0
The TGO formed on the NiCrAlYHfSi coating was different from those formed on the multilayer: α-Al2O3 was the main product, and trace Y2Hf2O7 was detected, but no θ-Al2O3 was detected in the first 20h oxidation. These results might have close relationship with the difference in oxidation rates between the NiCrAlYHfSi and multilayer coatings. The initial oxidation rates of the multilayer coating were relatively higher due to formation of θ-Al2O3. The oxidation rates of the NiCrAlYHfSi coating at steady stage were relatively higher because of formation of large precipitates of Y2Hf2O7 in the α-Al2O3 scale. The main constitution of the NiCrAlYHfSi coating, which is γ′-Ni3Al, was unchanged after oxidation test at 1050°C. Besides, the α-Al2O3 phase diffraction peaks became stronger as the oxidation time increased to 100h.	0
The surface morphologies of two coatings after oxidation at 1050°C for 100h are presented in a and b. Blade or needle-like metastable alumina morphology was found on the multilayer coating, which is associated with the formation of θ-Al2O3 in the initial oxidation stage. As the oxidation proceeds, the metastable θ-Al2O3 transformed into α-Al2O3, but the morphology is preserved. No spallation and cracks of TGO were found. As to the NiCrAlYHfSi coating, however, TGO was smoother, and a few area with spallation was observed.	0
c and d display the cross-sectional morphologies of two coatings after 100h oxidation at 1050°C. The AlN layers in the multilayer coating became broken. A few bright areas beneath the TGO were observed. According to EDS analysis, their composition was Ni—11Al—15Cr in wt.%, indicating they were γ′-Ni3Al phase. The TGO on the multilayer coating was about 2.5–3.0μm thick, while that on the NiCrAlYHfSi coating was about 3.5–4.5μm. A few cracks in TGO on the NiCrAlYHfSi coating were observed. The TGO on the multilayer coating was homogeneous, while that on the NiCrAlYHfSi coating exhibited dispersed bright phases. They are reactive element rich particles, according to the elemental mapping of the scale (). Y, Si and Hf were distributed in different ways. The distribution of Y overlaps the Si distribution while Hf is distributed homogeneously within the scale. As indicated by the XRD analysis (), no Si–Y oxides but Y2Hf2O7 was detected. Therefore, it is possible that Si–Y containing oxides might exist as amorphous phase.	0
The XRD spectra of the two coatings after oxidation at 1100°C are displayed in . Similar to the result of 1100°C oxidation, both α-Al2O3 and metastable θ-Al2O3 were detected on the multilayer coating after 20h oxidation, while θ-Al2O3 had transformed into α-Al2O3 after 100h oxidation at 1100°C. And β-NiAl is the dominant phase of the multilayer after oxidation, co-existing with γ′-Ni3Al and AlN. As for the NiCrAlYHfSi coating, the α-Al2O3 is the mainly constitution of TGO and trace Y2Hf2O7 was detected.	0
a shows the blade-like alumina morphology of the multilayer coating after 100h oxidation at 1100°C. Neither spallation nor cracks of TGO was observed on the surface of multilayer. However, severe spallation and cracking of TGO on the NiCrAlYHfSi coating occurred, as shown in b and d. The cross-sectional images (c and d) show that the TGO thicknesses of the multilayer and NiCrAlYHfSi coatings were about 3.5–4.0μm and 5.5–6.5μm, respectively. The amount of γ′-Ni3Al phase in the multilayer coating have increased as compared to the specimen after oxidation test at 1050°C.	0
 exhibits the cross-sectional BSE images of the multilayer and NiCrAlYHfSi coatings after 100h oxidation at 1100°C. The TGO/coating interface of the NiCrAlYHfSi coating was zigzagged. IDZ and secondary reaction zone (SRZ) in both coating specimens were observed. A near-continuous layer of Cr(W, Mo) within the IDZ of the multilayer was formed. Below the Cr(W, Mo) phase, granular particles of Cr(W, Re, Co) were observed. Many needle-like precipitates (bright color) existed in the SRZs of both coatings. Inter-diffusion between the multilayer coating and the substrate was slightly more severe than that between the NiCrAlYHfSi coating and the substrate. The chemical compositions of the NiCrAlYSiHf and the multilayer coating were Ni—25Cr—10Al and Ni—16Cr—28Al—9N, in wt.%, respectively, both with minor Y, Si, and Hf. So, the Al content in the multilayer coating is much higher. The multilayer coating after annealing contained 49.25 vol% hcp-AlN and 50.75 vol% β-NiAl(Cr), while the NiCrAlYSiHf coating contained γ′-Ni3Al and α-Cr. The β phase coating has higher Al activity than the γ' one, so the coating/substrate interdiffusion for β phase coating is severer .	0
STEM was employed to obtain the detailed microstructure information of the multilayer coating, the granular precipitates in IDZ and the needle precipitates in SRZ, as shown in a, b and c, respectively. The AlN layers were broken, probably because as-deposited AlN layers contained metallic Al. The broken AlN layer allows Al in the coating to diffuse faster to the surface and to the substrate. The largest particles of the remained AlN particles were about 200nm in diameter, about half of the thickness of as-deposited layers.  lists the chemical compositions by EDS at selected spots in the multilayer coating, IDZ and SRZ. The matrix of the IDZ and the SRZ was β-NiAl and γ′-Ni3Al, respectively. Cr was detected in both AlN and β-NiAl zones within the coating while substrate element Co was detected only in β-NiAl. The granular precipitates in IDZ were rich in Cr and doped with a few Ni, W and Mo while the needles in SRZ were consisted of Cr, Re, W, Mo, Ni and Co. The needle-like precipitates in SRZ have close relationship with the coating/substrate interdiffusion (Ni diffuses out while Al diffuses in), and have been extensively reported as refractory element-rich topologically close-packed (TCP) phases, e.g., μ phase .	0
Samples coated with the multilayer and NiCrAlYHfSi coatings were vacuum annealed at 1000°C. Their hardness changes versus annealing time are shown in . The multilayer coating exhibited almost the same hardness after 5h annealing. The NiCrAlYHfSi coating, however, experienced a sharp drop of hardness, from HV 660 to HV 501, by about 24%. As the annealing time prolonged, the hardness of both coated samples declined gradually. After 200h, the hardness of the multilayer coating dropped about 16% to HV 588, while that of NiCrAlYHfSi coating dropped 45% to HV 366. Higher hardness is beneficial for improving resistance against the foreign particle erosion which accelerates the degradation of the protective coating and shortens the service lifetime of the components.	1
The good performance of coatings at high temperature is due to the thermally grown oxide with good bonding strength and low growth rate. Al2O3, Cr2O3 and SiO2 are regarded as the priority choices for their thermodynamically stable properties and low growth rates at high temperature .	0
The as-sputtered multilayer coating comprised alternating Ni+CrAlYSiHfN layers in thickness about 300nm and AlN+Al layers in thickness about 400nm (). During annealing at 1000°C, β-NiAl was formed due to reaction between γ-Ni and Al (). After 20h of oxidation tests at either 1050 or 1100°C, both θ-Al2O3 and α-Al2O3 were detected (). After 100h tests, only α-Al2O3 can be detected. Metastable θ-Al2O3 formation on β-NiAl and the θ-Al2O3–α-Al2O3 transformation have been studied extensively . Metastable alumina, such as θ- or γ-Al2O3, is well known for its much faster growth rates than α-Al2O3, about one order of magnitude higher. The NiCrAlYHfSi coating comprised γ′-Ni3Al and α-Cr. So, no metastable alumina but α-Al2O3 was formed. Therefore, the oxidation rates of the multilayer coating in the early stages were higher than those of NiCrAlYHfSi coating because the former coating forms θ-Al2O3 scale while the latter coating forms α-Al2O3 scale.	1
The beneficial effect of reactive element on the high temperature oxidation and hot corrosion were extensively studied over 70 years . The reactive elements may play many kinds of roles, such as blocking fast pathway in the scales, prohibiting segregation of sulfur and other impurities at the metal-scale interface. Some suggested mechanisms, e.g., oxide pegs for improving scale adhesion, may cause different or opposite performance for different alloys and different reactive elements . In aluminides, Hf and Zr are preferable. In NiCrAl and FeCrAl, a combination of Y and Hf or Zr may produce the best benefit. But, as a single addition, Y is superior to Hf or Zr . Increased studies were focused on optimization the amount of various reactive elements on specific systems. For example, the sputtered K38 nanocrystalline coating containing 0.1wt.% Y had lower oxidation rates than those containing 0.05% or 0.5% at 1000°C . β-NiAl coating containing 0.05 at% Dy had lower oxidation rates than those containing 0.1% and 0.5% at 1000°C. It is well recognized that the amount of additions should be minimized so as not to form oxide precipitation in the scale . Y-rich oxide in the alumina scale was observed on NiCrAlY but not on NiCrAl–Y2O3. That is, adding yttrium reservoir may be a good idea for preventing the reactive element oxides from precipitating within the scales. In this work, the NiCrAlYSiHf coating contained 1.5wt.% reactive elements in total, as a result, Y2Hf2O7 and Y–Si-related precipitates were found in the scales. In contrast, the average contents of Y, Hf and Si in the multilayer coating are less than those in the NiCrAlYSiHf coating because the multilayer coating was prepared by alternating a NiCrAlYSiHf target and an Al one. Besides, the AlN layers separate the reactive elements in the coating, and may retard their migration to the oxide scale. So, an alumina scale free of large Y2Hf2O7 particles was formed on the multilayer coating. Therefore, the oxidation rates of the multilayer coating in the long-term stages were lower than those of NiCrAlYHfSi coating.	0
In addition to low growth rate of TGO, good adherence of TGO to the coating is another key factor for a good coating. The spallation of TGO correlates with both thermal stresses and growth stresses, especially the former . It is well agreed that thick scales are more prone to spall. The lateral growth strain of TGO has linear thickness dependence . The tolerable compressive strains in an Al2O3 scale are decreased with thickness .	0
The thermal stress is due to the coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) mismatch of the TGO and coatings when heating up and cooling down. The elastic thermal stresses in a thin film generated due to the CTE mismatch during cooling can be estimated by using expression :where E is the Young’s modulus, ν is the Poisson’s ratio, Δα is the difference in CTE between the film and the substrate, ΔT is the temperature changes, and h is the thickness. The subscripts f and s refer to the film and the substrate, respectively. Accordingly, the thermal stresses are proportional to the CTE mismatch.	0
The CTEs of NiCrAlY are in the range of 12–19.5×10−6K−1 for temperatures from 900 to 1100°C . Many studies indicate that the α-Al2O3 scales thermally grown on NiCrAlY are resistant to spallation at 1000°C. For example, for a Ni—23Cr—8Al—0.5Y (wt.%) coating on a single crystal superalloy DD32, no TGO spallation was observed after oxidation for 700 cycles (each cycle consisted of 60min exposure at 1000°C and 20min of cooling down) . In this work, TGO spallation was observed either at 1050°C () or at 1100°C (). The mass gains for the above-mentioned NiCrAlY coating were about 0.32mg/cm2 for 100h at 1000°C . However, the NiCrAlYHfSi coating in the present work had a mass gain of 0.62mg/cm2 after 100h oxidation at 1050°C, nearly twice higher. Therefore, spallation of TGO on NiCrAlY may occur at 1050°C even though does not occur at 1000°C, because of much higher TGO growth rates at 1050°C. Besides, the temperature dependence of CTE of NiCrAlY is almost linear below 900°C, and then increased faster at higher temperatures . This may lead to extra higher thermal stresses.	0
The NiCrAlYHfSi coating has a CET about 19.5×10−6K−1 at 1100°C as mentioned above. The multilayer coating contains 49.25 vol% hcp-AlN and 50.75 vol% β-NiAl(Cr), so its CTE should be between αAlN=9×10−6K−1 and αNiAl=15.5×10−6K−1 at 1100°C. Thus, the thermal stresses generated in the TGO on the multilayer coating may be much lower than those on the NiCrAlYHfSi coating according to Eq. , due to the lower thermal expansion of the multilayer coating.	0
The tolerable compressive strains in an Al2O3 scale are decreased with thickness . As can be seen from the SEM results, the TGO thickness formed on the multilayer after 100h oxidation at 1050°C and 1100°C are 2.5–3.0μm and 3.5–4.5μm, respectively. TGOs formed on the NiCrAlYHfSi coatings after oxidation at the same condition have a thickness of 3.5–4.0μm and 5.5–6.5μm. That is, the thickness of TGO on the multilayer coating is about 5/8 and 9/11 of that on the NiCrAlYHfSi coating at 1050°C and 1100°C, respectively. The good resistance to TGO spallation of the multilayer coating may also result from the lower TGO growth rates.	0
In summary, the multilayer coating formed an α-Al2O3 scale free of large particles of reactive element oxide, probably because the average contents of Y, Hf and Si are low and the AlN layers may hinder their migration to the TGO. The good resistance to TGO spallation of the multilayer coating may result from the low growth rate of TGO and the low mismatch of coefficient of thermal expansion between the TGO and the coating due to large volume percent of AlN.	0
A multilayer coating, about 40μm thick, was prepared by reactive magnetron sputtering. The as-deposited coating comprised alternating Ni+CrAlYSiHfN layers (γ-Ni, hcp-AlN and CrN), about 300nm thick, and AlxN layers (hcp-AlN and fcc-Al), about 400nm thick. After annealing in vacuum at 1000°C for 1h, the coating maintained its multilayer microstructure while the phase composition became β-NiAl and hcp-AlN.	0
The oxidation products of the multilayer coating were a mixture of α-Al2O3 and θ-Al2O3 after oxidation at 1050 and 1100°C for 20h, and exclusive α-Al2O3 after 100h. Degradation of β-NiAl→γ′-Ni3Al was observed after oxidation tests. Y2Hf2O7 precipitates were observed in the TGO scale on the NiCrAlYHfSi coating.	0
As compared to the NiCrAlYHfSi coating, the oxidation rates of the multilayer coating were relatively higher at the initial stage and lower at steady stage. TGO spallation at 1050 and 1100°C was observed on the NiCrAlYHfSi coating but not on the multilayer coating.	0
The multilayer coating had higher micro-hardness than the NiCrAlYHfSi coating in the as-prepared condition and after annealing for 200h at 1000°C.	0
This work was support by National Key Basic Research Program of China (973 Program, No. 2012CB625100) and by National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 51231001).	0
The given data will show authors in the field of surface Engineering the relationship and effect between the ceramic nanoparticles and metallic electrolyte and the constant metallic matrix nanocomposite bath in a given engineering application.	0
The data obtained for the zinc matrix electrolyte as well as the incorporated nanoparticulates can be used as inference to determine the anomalous metal matrix co-deposition coating for other intended nanocomposite coating.	0
The data can be used to examine the relationship between the process variable for instance (current and particle loading) as it influences the nature of coating characteristic produced.	0
The data could be used at investigating the coating progress between the coating thickness, weight gain and the surface area of the incorporated nanoparticulates.	0
The data acquired can be used in investigating the trend in microhardness profile of the Matrices of Nanocomposite either at room or elevated temperature for surface application.	0
The coating thickness, weight gained, coating per unit area at constant deposition time were collected and a distinctive set of experimental frame work data were produced. The depositions current was carried out at varying values of 1.0–1.5 A at a stirring rate of 400 rpm at 70 °C temperature. The data acquired from elemental analysis of the mild steel is presented in . The coating depositions was run with two opposing zinc anode to enhance uniform coating. Also, data showing coating variable in term of current and loading of particles was gathered (See  and ).	1
An electrocodeposition system used for this set up is shown in . The dimension of the mild steel (substrate) used was 45 mm × 40 mm × 20 mm. Zinc sheets of 85 mm × 45 mm × 5 mm with 99.99% were prepared as anodes as described . The mild steel specimens were polished mechanically, degreased and rinsed with water as described . Powder purchased from Sigma Aldrich was used as received. The bath formulations were prepared a day before and stir continuously at the rate of 400 rpm to obtain homogeneous mixture. The bath compositions used for the different coating matrix is as follows: ZnCl2 120 g/l; KCl 30 g/l; TiO2 nanoparticles 20 g/l; WO3, ZnO, and SnO2nanoparticles 8–15 g/l each; 2- Butyne 1,4 diol 0.5 g/l; Cetylpridinium Chloride 0.5 g/l and 10 g/l of Thiourea. KCl was added to increase the conductivity of the electrolyte, 2- Butyne 1,4 diol and Cetylpridinium Chloride were added as surfactants to reduce the surface tension of the solution which in turn lower the surface energy, so as to give good adhesion. The dispersion reinforcement behaviour which often causes change in coating performance  helps to obtained coating thickness, weight gained, coating per unit area generated and presented in .	1
The authors acknowledged Surface Engineering Research Centre, (SERC) Tshwane University of Technology, and financial research support received from .	0
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at .	0
The Ni-base superalloys have been widely used for producing crucial parts of gas turbine engines for over 50 years, thereby having been drawing extensive research over many various fields of study [1–11]. Chromium commonly exists in nickel-based superalloys due to the protective effects of Cr against hot corrosion and high temperature oxidation. In recent years, a high Cr content cast Ni-base superalloy, K4648, which contains 32–35wt.% chromium, has been employed to manufacture advanced gas turbine engines. This alloy currently contains the highest Cr level in applied Ni-base superalloys, and possesses high degree of hot corrosion resistance, weldability, and lower cost relative to the Co-base superalloys. Although the microstructures and properties of high Cr content wrought superalloys have been investigated [12–14], studies of cast 32–35wt.% high Cr alloys have been limited.	0
Currently, K4648 alloy is widely used in manufacturing large size complex integral castings in gas turbines, such as diffuser and vector jet nozzle components. However, this alloy suffered from low impact ductility in some cases. The authors have recently shown that the large blocky primary α phase tended to precipitate from liquid phase in the grain boundary or interdendritic region of as-cast specimens and proposed this as an explanation for the decrease in impact ductility of K4648 alloy. The primary α phase, which is rich in chromium and iron and with a body centered cubic (BCC) structure, has been proved to be harmful to the ductility, toughness, and corrosion resistance properties of stainless steels [15]. The impact strength drop was found to be correlated with the precipitation of secondary α-Cr phase at the grain boundaries of the wrought superalloy IN718 [16]. This phase has been demonstrated to form after long time exposure at 623–704°C [17]. Moreover, the rod-like α-Cr phase precipitated in the interdendritic region of a single crystal superalloy DD8 during thermal exposure [18]. In author's previous work, similar structural primary α phase precipitation from liquid in late solidification of a high W content cast Ni-base superalloy has been shown [19]. However, the cause of primary α phase formation in as-cast high Cr content Ni-base superalloys and its effect on mechanical properties remain to be characterized.	0
In this paper, we investigated the characteristics, formation, and transformation of the primary α phase and its effect on the impact ductility in the high Cr content cast Ni-base superalloy K4648. The elucidation of the mechanisms involved in primary α formation may improve the impact ductility of high Cr content Ni-base superalloy.	0
The analyzed composition of K4648 alloy is given in Table 1. The specimens used in this investigation were cut from testing bars or large section castings which were remelted and poured by K4648 master alloy ingots. In order to understand the effect of the cooling rate during solidification on the as-cast microstructure of alloy, the section size of the sample covered from 10×10mm impact testing bar to 40×60mm heavy section casting. Isothermal solidification followed quenching (ISQ) experiments were conducted to understand the solidification process of alloy. The ISQ technique is an effective method to determine the phase-specific precipitation temperatures and the liquid residual volume fraction and has been reported in previous works [20–23]. In this investigation, samples sizes of 5×5×10mm3 were cut from as-cast master alloy ingot, surrounded by slurry made of alumina powder and silicasol, and embedded into graphite blocks with existing drill holes. This packaging protected the melted alloy from flowing out and oxidizing. The blocks with embedded samples were heated up to 1360°C and held for 10min to allow full remelting. This was followed by cooling to different isothermal temperature in the range of 1350–1150°C at rate of 10°C/min and quenching with water to determine the precipitation temperature of primary α phase. The composition of primary α phase and the segregation of Cr between solid and frozen liquid phase during isothermal solidification were detected by energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). Differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) experiments was carried out using a NETZSCH STA 409C analyzer to determine the precipitation temperatures range of the phases. The rates of heating and cooling were set at 10°C/min. The as-cast specimens with different section sizes were solid solutionized at 1180–1220°C for 1–2h and 1180°C/4h to examine the solution and the transformation of the primary α phase. The α phase and transformed M23C6 carbides was distinguished by a 10g potash prussiate+10g NaOH+100ml H2O solution etching. Impact test was carried out on samples cut from a K4648 testing bar and heavy section casting, which have been heat treated at 1180°C/4h A.C.+900°C/16h A.C. The fracture surfaces and longitudinal sections of impact specimens were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to explore the effects of primary α phase on impact ductility. Electrolytic extraction of minor phases in as-cast K4648 alloy was performed in a Methanol solution containing 10% HCl at a voltage of 6V for 2h. The extracted residues were identified using a D8 advanced X-ray Diffractometer (XRD). The microstructure of K4648 alloy was revealed by 10ml HNO3+30ml HCl chemical etching or by electrolytic etching in 15%H2SO4–methanol solution and analyzed by optical metallography (OM), quantitative metallography (QM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and energy dispersive spectrum (EDS).	1
The as-cast microstructure of K4648 alloy is presented in Fig. 1. A dendritic structure is evident in all specimens, with distinct dendritic arm spacing for different section size samples. The casting with a section size of 40×60mm possesses a dendritic arm spacing almost one time higher than that of the 10×10mm impact testing bar (Fig. 1a and c). Under higher magnification, it is revealed that the blocky primary α phase, MC carbides, and occasional M3B2 borides are distributed in the interdendritic region and grain boundaries (Fig. 1b and d). The specimens with a large section size of 40×60mm possess larger and more numerous α phase than do the 10×10mm samples due to the slow solidification, which can be proved by the data in Table 2.	1
The X-ray diffraction measurements of extracted minor phases for large section specimen are shown in Fig. 2, and prove the existence of α phase (body-centered cubic solid solution), MC, M23C6 and M3B2. Small quantities of η and σ are also present due to the severe segregation during slow solidification.	0
The compositions of primary α phases are listed in Table 3. The α phases consist mainly of elemental Cr and Ni, and small amounts of solutionized Mo and W. It was noteworthy that the concentration of elemental Ni in primary α phase can be as high as 30at.%. Alpha phase can therefore be represented as α-(Cr, Ni). Based on the NiCr binary phase diagram [24], the maximum solubility of Ni in Cr is 38at.% at 1345°C and Ni has almost no solubility in Cr below 600°C. However, in this study, 32.48–33.41at.% Ni, over 10at.% total W plus Mo content solutionized in primary α phase, indicate that the primary α phase is an oversaturated solid solution phase.	0
The Vickers microhardness test at a load of 0.2N was carried out, and the primary α phase possessed a hardness of 6.3GPa, which was three times harder than that of γ matrix, which was 1.93GPa (Fig. 3). Cracks present in large blocky primary α phases of as-cast heavy section casting (Fig. 1d), indicate that primary α phase is hard and brittle.	1
The isothermal solidification specimens was remelted at 1360°C and held for 10min, followed by water quenching cooling (ISQ) to determine the phase-specific precipitation temperatures and the liquid residual volume fraction. The solidification sequence for various phases of K4648 alloy are illustrated in Fig. 4. The solidified and unsolidified regions at different temperatures can be clearly distinguished by the coarse dendrites as solid (S) and ultra fine dendrites as liquid (L) (Fig. 4b). The frozen liquid fraction in the solidified specimens at different temperatures was plotted against solidification temperature as shown in Fig. 5.	1
It could be seen that the primary α phase did not form as the temperature decreased to 1200°C (Fig. 4d). The onset of the primary α phase precipitation took place at 1190°C (Fig. 4e) from very small amount of residual liquid (about 1vol.%, Fig. 5). Script-like fine MC carbides formed in residual liquid region after quenching at 1310°C with a residual liquid volume fraction of 13.7vol.% (Figs. 5 and 6a). Moreover, small amounts of blocky fine quenched α phase began to precipitate accompanied by the formation of fine MC carbides in the residual liquid region at 1290°C (Figs. 5 and 6b) as the residual liquid volume fraction decreased to 7.4vol.%. The composition of frozen residual liquid at 1290°C, 1200°C and α phase at 1190°C compared with that of the bulk alloy are listed in Table 4 (Table 1, Figs. 4d and e, 6b). The concentration of Cr in the residual liquid region increased with decreasing temperature during solidification. The Cr level in the residual liquid at 1200°C can reach up to 51at.%, which is close to the composition of primary α-(Cr,Ni) phase (Table 4), and the α phase precipitate at 1190°C. Therefore, the continuous segregation of elemental Cr in the residual liquid during solidification resulted in the formation of primary α phase.	0
The specimens cut from the thin section testing bars and heavy section castings were solid solutionized at 1180°C, 1200°C and 1220°C for 1h, the microstructures were shown in Fig. 7. During the solid solution treatment of K4648 alloy at temperatures above 1180°C, small size primary α phase solutionized, larger primary α phase transformed into M23C6 carbides (Fig. 7a–d). The M23C6 carbides has been reported to be formed through the reaction MC+γ→M23C6+γ′ previously [25]. However, in this investigation, the reaction of α-(Cr,Ni)+C→M23C6 occurred through the in situ a phase absorbed carbon. It was evident that the primary α phase obviously solutionized as the temperature was held at 1180°C for 1h. The solutionized α phase increased with increasing temperature (Fig. 7). Finally, at 1220°C/1h, almost all primary α phase solutionized or transformed into M23C6 carbides (Fig. 7e and f). Moreover, incipient melting occurred at a temperature range of 1200–1220°C. In superalloys, the incipient melting often occurs during high temperature heat treatment [26]. After solution etching with 10g potash prussiate+10g NaOH+100ml H2O, the primary α phase exhibited line etching and green or pink color in optical metallography, compared with the gray color of M23C6 carbides (Fig. 7a–d). This color difference can be used to distinguish these two phases in quantitative metallography. The volume fraction of primary α phase in as-cast and in different temperature solid solution treated specimens are shown in Fig. 8, and reveal that the amount of primary α phase decreased with increasing the solution temperature. It was evident that the volume fractions of primary α phase in faster cooled thin section testing bars were much lower than that in slow-cooled heavy section castings at corresponding solid solution temperatures. Therefore, the faster cooling during solidification process can decrease the amount of primary α phase in both as-cast and heat-treated K4648 alloys.	1
Standard solid solution heat treatment of 1180°C/4h was performed both on the 10×10mm and 40×60mm specimens, and the results were illustrated in Fig. 9. In thin section specimen, some primary α phase transformed into regular shaped M23C6 carbides in situ, others solid solutionized. Furthermore, small granular M23C6 precipitated from the γ matrix at the periphery of transformed blocky M23C6 carbides (Fig. 9a). However, large blocky primary α phase only partially transformed into M23C6 carbides in large section specimens after 1180°C/4h treatment (Fig. 9b). It was noteworthy that the primary α phase and transformed M23C6 carbides exhibit a network-like distribution in heavy section specimens, whereas they have a more uniform and isolated distribution in the faster cooled thin section specimens.	1
The compositions of residual α phase and transformed M23C6 carbides in specimens with different section sizes are listed in Table 5. It can be concluded by comparing the data in Tables 3 and 5 that the solid solution treated specimens possess similar compositions of the residual α phase to those of as-cast specimens. It was noteworthy that the M23C6 carbide possesses as much higher content of Cr and less Ni than did the primary α phase. In summary, after solid solution treatment in the 1180–1220°C range, the primary α phase solutionized or transformed into more brittle M23C6 carbides. Moreover, the volume fraction of primary α phase decreased with increasing the solution temperature.	0
The impact testing bars were cut from 10×10mm shaped bar and 40×60mm casting with a 1180°C/4h+900°C/16h standard heat treatment. The impact ductility of specimens at ambient temperature are shown in Fig. 10. The result indicated that the impact ductility of thin section specimen was twice as high as that of heavy section samples. The impact ductility of slow-cooled heavy section specimens did not meet the K4648 specification minimum requirement of 19.6J/cm2. A micrograph of fracture surface and longitudinal section of the impact ductility specimens are shown in Fig. 11. Extensive cracks appeared in brittle primary α phase and the transformed M23C6 carbides (Fig. 11a, c, and e) on the fracture surface. Brittle fractures occurred in slower cooled heavy section specimens. Under higher magnification, a “river pattern” structure is obvious in regions marked by arrows in Fig. 11e. The river pattern appearance is the main feature of the cleavage fracture. Additionally, secondary cracks formed at these phases and the interfaces of α/matrix or M23C6/matrix, especially in heavy section samples (Fig. 11c and d). It can be seen by comparing Fig. 11c and d with Fig. 9b that a network-like distribution of brittle primary α phase and the transformed M23C6 carbides was evident in slow-cooled heavy section specimens and secondary cracks were prone to propagate at these continuous distributed brittle phases (Fig. 11c and d). In contrast, cracking of the small carbides formed at a faster cooling rate was contained by surrounding ductile γ matrix (Fig. 11a and b). The compositions of cracked phases were detected by EDS and the results are listed in Table 6. Comparing the data in Tables 5 and 6, the compositions of phases are similar, indicating that the cracked phases are primary α phase and transformed M23C6 carbides.	1
The impact ductility of the K4648 alloy related to the size, volume fraction and the distribution of primary α-(Cr,Ni) phase. It can be concluded that the large amount and size of blocky primary α phase with a network-like distribution formed at slower cooling rate during solidification process in heavy section specimens should be responsible for the lower impact ductility of the high Cr content K4648 alloy. As mentioned above, it was difficult to completely solid solutionized the large blocky primary α phase, which tended to transform into the more brittle M23C6 carbides, with both phases resulting in diminished ductility. Therefore, proper parameter to obtain faster cooling in the solidification of the alloy must be considered to avoid the detrimental primary α phase precipitation.	0
Primary α-(Cr,Ni) phase exists in the as-cast microstructure of K4648 alloy. It is an oversaturated solid solution of Ni, Mo and W in Cr. The concentration of elemental Ni can reach more than 30at.%. At a load of 0.2N, α-(Cr,Ni) phase possesses a vickers microhardness of 6.3GPa. It is hard and brittle and tends to crack in both as-cast and heat treated alloy.	0
The onset of the primary α-(Cr,Ni) precipitation took place at 1190°C at late solidification from very small amounts of residual liquid (about 1vol.%) in the interdendritic region and grain boundaries, and was caused by the continuous segregation of Cr during the solidification process.	0
The primary α phase solid solutionized and transformed into M23C6 carbides in the range of 1180–1220°C. Incipient melting occurred in the 1200–1220°C range. The volume fraction of primary α phase decreased with increasing the solid solution temperature. The faster cooling during solidification process can decrease the amount of primary α phase in both as-cast and heat-treated K4648 alloys.	0
Extensive cracked α phase or transformed M23C6 carbides can be observed at the fracture surfaces and longitudinal sections of impact specimens and led to decrease impact ductility of high Cr content cast Ni-base superalloy K4648. Brittle fractures occurred in slower cooled heavy section castings specimens due to the existence of large amounts and sizes of blocky primary α-(Cr,Ni) phase with a network-like distribution. It was difficult to remove this phase by heat treatment. Therefore, the parameter control during the solidification process of alloy is significant, and faster cooling becomes an effective method to avoid the detrimental large blocky primary α phase precipitation.	0
Phase transformation behavior of high-Nb TiAl alloy was investigated.	0
The expansion behaviors of the alloy during cooling were investigated by DIL.	0
The microhardness of the alloy suffered from cooling was also tested.	0
The transformation temperature decreases with the cooling rate increasing.	0
TiAl alloys are presently receiving considerable attention as structural materials for elevated-temperature aerospace and automotive applications, owing to their unique combination of attractive properties such as low density, high strength, good modulus retention, high melting point, and superior creep and oxidation resistance and so on . However, one disadvantage of TiAl alloys is poor ductility and toughness at ambient temperature . Then, many researchers focused on the improvement of TiAl alloys properties and found that Nb addition in alloys can greatly improve the mechanical properties . Nb containing TiAl alloys based on the general composition Ti–45Al-(5–10)Nb exhibit high mechanical strength and good corrosion resistance at elevated temperature and appreciable ductility at ambient temperature . The properties of TiAl alloys induced by higher Nb content are more excellent than those of lower Nb content; therefore, high Nb–TiAl alloys such as Ti–45Al-(8–10)Nb have been paid more and more attentions in recent years and regarded as a new generation of TiAl alloys . The researchers mainly focused on the manufacturing process , microstructure evolution and controlling , mechanical properties , phase relationships and phase diagram construction , workability at high temperature  and so on. Undoubtedly, all the properties of alloys are related to phase composition and microstructure. Understanding the phase transformation kinetics of the alloys can help to determine ideal heat treating process and optimize the mechanical properties.	0
Therefore, the phase transformation behaviors of TiAl-based alloys began to be focused in recent years. Hu et al.  studied the phase transformation behaviors of Ti–46Al–2Nb–2Cr–1B, Ti–46Al–4Nb–4Hf–0.1Si–1B and Ti–44Al–4Nb–4Zr–0.2Si–0.3B alloys by defining CCT and TTT curves and aimed to optimize the properties of these alloys. Veeraraghavan et al.  investigated the nucleation kinetics of α→γm massive transformation in Ti–47.5 at% Al alloy and discussed the possible nucleation mechanisms during the massive transformation. The global kinetics of α→α2+γ transformation during continuous cooling in near-γ Ti–48 at%Al–2%Cr–2%Nb alloy were studied by Charpentier et al. and the quantitative relations between the kinetics, structural and thermal parameters were also established . Zong et al.  and Yang et al.  in-situ investigated the phase transformation in TiAl alloys using high-temperature laser-scanning confocal microscopy. Barriobero-Vila et al.  investigated the effect of phase transformation kinetics on the formation of α in the β-quenched Ti–5Al–5Mo–5V–3Cr–1Zr metastable β titanium alloy by means of in situ high energy synchrotron X-ray diffraction complemented by metallographic analysis. From the reports, the phase transformation behaviors of more new TiAl alloys had been investigated and some modern test methods began to be used in this field.	0
Due to the difference of thermal expansion for different phases, DIL has been also used to trace the solid-state phase transformation under a controlled temperature program. From the DIL curves, the phase growth and transformation kinetics in various systems can be obtained , and DIL is considered as a powerful tool used in the study of phase transformation. In present work, the phase transformation kinetics of Ti–45Al–8.5Nb–0.2W–0.2B–0.02Y (in at.%) alloy during continuous cooling was investigated in situ by DIL, which also associated with the phase composition and morphology through XRD and OM; meanwhile, the microhardness of the alloy was also tested.	0
As-cast alloy with nominal composition of Ti–45Al–8.5Nb–0.2W–0.2B–0.02Y (at. %) prepared using plasma cold hearth melting furnace was used in this study. In order to make the compositions distribute homogeneously, the alloy was heated at 1340 °C (in the single α-phase region) for 12 h with heating rate of 5 °C/min and then cooled down to 900 °C with cooling rate of 5 °C/min, followed by furnace cooling. After heat treating, cylindrical samples with size of 6 mm in diameter and 12 mm in length were cut using an electro-discharge machine.	1
For the test of thermal expansion, the samples were ground and polished to the size of 5 mm in diameter and 10 mm in length using normalized techniques, and cleaned ultrasonically in ethyl alcohol for 20 min at last. The expansion of the alloy during cooling courses was measured using a computer-controlled horizontal pushrod dilatometer (Netzsch DIL 402C) with a high-resolution displacement transducer and performed under high purity Ar flow (99.999%) to prevent oxidizing. The procedure was as follows: the samples were heated up to 1340 °C with the heating rate of 3 °C/min and held for 20 min at 1340 °C, and then cooled down to room temperature with cooling rate of 3 °C/min, 5 °C/min, 10 °C/min, 20 °C/min and 40 °C/min, respectively.	0
The samples used for XRD, OM and microhardness test were treated as same as DIL testing, and another sample was heated as same as DIL testing but cooled by water quenching (WQ). Phase compositions of the alloy were examined by ARL X’TRA X-ray diffractometer (copper target, voltage 35 kV and electric current 40 mA). For the observation of morphology, the samples were etched using the solution of 5 ml HF, 10 ml HNO3 and 85 ml H2O before test. The microhardness of the alloy was characterized by Vickers hardness, the test force and duration time were 200 N and 10 s separately.	1
The phase compositions of the high Nb–TiAl alloy cooled down to room temperature under the cooling rates of 3 °C/min, 5 °C/min, 10 °C/min, 20 °C/min, 40 °C/min and WQ are shown in . It can be seen that the main phases of the alloy are γ (TiAl with near-cubic face-centered tetragonal Ll0 crystal structure) and α2 (Ti3Al with the D019 structure based on hcp lattice), no matter how fast the alloy was cooled. What's more, the fraction of α2 phases increases with the cooling rate increasing while the γ phase decreases. When the cooling rate was less than 40 °C/min, γ phase is the dominant phase and only a little α2 phase exist; however, α2 phase becomes the major phase when the alloy was cooled by WQ.	0
 shows the OM images of high Nb–TiAl alloy after continuous cooling with different rates. As shown in , the morphologies of the alloys are all lamellar when the cooling rate ranges from 3 °C/min to 40 °C/min. However, the microstructures of the alloy cooled at different cooling rate are various; the lamellar colony sizes decreases with the cooling rate increasing and gradually becomes homogeneous. From (a)–(e), it also can be seen that the interlamellar spacing is narrower and narrower.	0
As shown in  (f), the microstructure of the alloy cooled by WQ is composed of α2 phase (Light regions) and γ phase (dark regions), which were transformed from parent α phase. Besides, the area fraction of α2 is much larger than γ phase, since the γ formation can be suppressed before going to completion by the competing α→α2 ordering phase transformation . The results are also confirmed from the XRD patterns shown in .	0
During heat treating, the volume change of the alloy is affected by two aspects: the lattice change caused by temperature change and crystal structure variation induced by phase transformation . The relationship between the lattice change and the temperature is linear while the relationship of crystal structure variation and temperature is nonlinear, then the phase transformation of alloy can be determined from the volume change under heat treating.  shows the dilatometric curves of high Nb–TiAl alloy cooled under the cooling rates of 3 °C/min, 5 °C/min, 10 °C/min, 20 °C/min and 40 °C/min, and  (b) shows the expansion coefficient curves that are the differential curves of the dilatometric curves. As shown in , the relative expansion (ΔL/L0) decreases linearly with the temperature decreasing at the initial stage of cooling, this is induced by the shrinkage of the lattice. After that, ΔL/L0 decreases nonlinearly and this behavior is clearly shown in . From , two peaks exist in every expansion coefficient curve regardless of the cooling rate, the first great peak represents the phase transformation process: hexagonal α→tetragonal γ and the small peak indicates disorder α→ordered α2. It is worth noting that both of the phase transformation processes shift to lower temperature with the cooling rate increasing.	0
According to the DIL curves of high Nb–TiAl alloy cooled under different cooling rate, two phase transformations: α→γ and α→α2 can be distinguished from each other clearly and the end of α→γ transformation is the start of α→α2 transformation. Then, the volume fraction of γ or α2 phase at a certain temperature can be calculated by the following formula :Where f(T) is the volume fraction of new phase at T °C, ΔL1 is the initial length variation of the alloy before phase transforming, ΔL(T) is the length variation at T °C and ΔL2 is the finial length variation when the phase transformation is finished.	0
 shows the volume fraction evolution of γ phase and α2 phase during continuous cooling under the cooling rates of 3 °C/min, 5 °C/min, 10 °C/min, 20 °C/min and 40 °C/min. As shown in , the volume fraction curves of γ phase present “S” shape, which shows that the phase transformation process includes pre-nucleation and nucleation stage, growth stage and equilibrium stage. Take the cooling rate of 5 °C/min as an example, the volume fraction of γ phase increases slowly with the temperature decreasing from 1285 °C to 1270 °C, which is the stage of γ phase nucleating and breeding at the grain boundary of parent α phase; when it is less than 1270 °C, the γ phase increases rapidly and arrives at the end of phase transformation at 1230 °C. The volume fraction evolution of α2 phase during continuous cooling is similar to that of γ phase; however, the induction period of α2 phase formation is shorter compared with γ phase generation.	0
The phase transformation kinetics of Ti–45Al–8.5Nb–0.2W–0.2B–0.02Y alloy can be displayed in the form of a continuous cooling transformation (CCT) diagram, as shown in . According to , the α→γ phase transformation occurs in the temperature range of 1150 °C–1310 °C while the α→α2 phase transformation takes place between 1100 °C and 1220 °C. Obviously, the transformation temperature is related to the cooling rate, which decreases with the cooling rate increasing. The duration time of α→γ transformation under the cooling rate of 3 °C/min, 5 °C/min, 10 °C/min, 20 °C/min and 40 °C/min are 1400s, 1020s, 445s, 290s and 105s, respectively; while, for α→α2 transformation, it separately lasts for 1300s, 950s, 490s, 160s and 75s. All the results indicate that α→γ and α→α2 transformation rates increase with the cooling rate increasing.	0
As we know, the heat treating history has a great effect on the performances of the alloy; it is significant to investigate the effect of cooling rate on the properties of the alloy. For mechanical performance tests, the hardness test is a simple and easy to operate method; what's more, the hardness values of alloy have a linear relationship with the yield stress and further reflect the processing performance, which promises the mechanical properties to be predicted simply . Therefore, the vickers hardness of high Nb–TiAl alloy suffered from cooling with the rates of 3 °C/min, 5 °C/min, 10 °C/min, 20 °C/min, 40 °C/min and WQ were investigated in this study and the results are shown in . It is evident that a faster cooling rate results in higher hardness for the high Nb–TiAl alloy, although the hardness difference of the alloy cooled at 5 °C/min, 10 °C/min and 20 °C/min is small. One reason is that the lamellar spacing and the lamellar colony sizes decrease with the cooling rate increasing, as shown in , which increase the hardness due to more lamellas exist in a given area. On the other hand, the increase of hardness is caused by the variation of phase composition as the volume fraction of α2 phase increases with the cooling rate increasing while the γ phase fraction decreases (see ), and the hardness of α2 phase is probably two times that of γ phase .	0
The phase transformation behavior of Ti–45Al–8.5Nb–0.2W–0.2B–0.02Y alloy cooled from parent α phase under the cooling rates of 3 °C/min, 5 °C/min, 10 °C/min, 20 °C/min, 40 °C/min and WQ was investigated in this work. Several conclusions are as follows:	0
Two phase transformation courses, α→γ and α→α2, take place during continuous cooling. γ and α2 phases coexist in the crystal structure of the alloy after cooling, regardless of the cooling rate. The relative fraction of γ and α2 mainly depends on the cooling rate, γ phase is the dominant phase for the cooling rate less than 40 °C/min while the α2 phase becomes the major phase when the alloy was cooled by WQ.	0
The morphology of the alloy suffered from cooling is lamellar when the cooling rate ranges from 3 °C/min to 40 °C/min. However, the lamellar colony sizes and interlamellar spacing decrease with the cooling rate increasing.	0
For Ti–45Al–8.5Nb–0.2W–0.2B–0.02Y alloy, the α→γ phase transformation occurs in the temperature range of 1150 °C–1310 °C while the α→α2 phase transformation takes place between 1100 °C and 1220 °C. The transformation temperature decreases with the cooling rate increasing, and the higher the cooling rate is, the higher the phase transformation rate is.	0
The microhardness of high Nb–TiAl alloy increases with the cooling rate increasing due to the variation of phase composition and the decrease of lamellar colony sizes and lamellar spacing.	0
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of  (No.2015DFA51430),  (No.51401105) and the  (PAPD).	0
In nuclear applications, such as in the frame of Compact Linear Collider's (CLIC), copper radio frequency structures are used for acceleration at 12GeV. In order to extract safely the High Order Modes (HOM) travelling along with the main electromagnetic field, Silicon Carbide (SiC) is commonly used as an absorber. The joint between SiC and copper is currently mechanically done. As a long-term development copper-to-SiC brazed joints need to be further developed. As result of this strategy, several Cu-SiC joining tests have been performed and their results have been carefully analysed. Previous CLIC tests on direct brazed joints were unsuccessful . The expansion mismatch between the copper piece and the SiC piece produced excessive mechanical stress in the interface which led to a brittle fracture on the SiC side.	0
In the present manufacturing scenario, the need for joining of dissimilar materials is drastically increasing and it can never be ignored. Various conventional and unconventional joining processes are explored to find the joining feasibility. Among them, transient liquid phase bonding is an effective process to join dissimilar materials with high integrity. The major drawback of the Transient Liquid Phase (TLP) bonding process is the thermal mismatch between the base materials . Gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW) can be used to join Metal/Ceramic parts. Because of the high-energy input, the GTAW process tends to cause a broad fusion zone and a very large heat-affected zone (HAZ), necessitating a post-weld heat treatment. Brazing is an alternative technique for joining components. However, brazed joints often contain hard and brittle intermetallic phases, which decrease the mechanical and corrosion properties of the bonding areas. Fusion welding processes are inefficient for joining of advanced materials due to forming undesirable interfacial reactions between the Metal/Ceramic components, poor flow ability of the liquid welding pool, and producing defects such as porosity in the bonding area. Transient Liquid Phase (TLP) bonding process is applied to join materials of various combinations such as metal-metal, metal-ceramics and ceramics-ceramics which cannot be bonded by other conventional fusion welding techniques. The joint produced by this bonding process is tolerant to surface oxides and geometrical defects. This bonding technique has a wide range of applications in repair operations and production of automobile components, fuel cladding in nuclear power plants and connection of circuit lines in electronic industries .	0
The interlayer material plays an important role in Transient Liquid Phase (TLP) bonding technique. It is placed between the base metals to be joined. The major consideration for the interlayer material is that it should possess a lower melting point than the substrate/base material . The whole specimen is usually placed in a Transient Liquid Phase (TLP) setup and heated to a temperature below the melting point of the substrate material and the assembly is held at the bonding temperature for a specific time period for isothermal solidification. The resultant joint possesses a higher re-melting temperature than the initial melting temperature .	0
Bonding temperature is the most important process parameter and it is chiefly responsible for sound joints with good mechanical properties. The bonding temperature is sometimes completely limited by the microstructural stability of the base metal . If the substrate materials allow flexibility in selecting an optimised bonding temperature, a minimum isothermal solidification time can be achieved at a certain temperature . However, a critical bonding temperature has been achieved for various systems. If the bonding temperature is higher than the critical one, the time of complete isothermal solidification increases. In some cases, liquefaction between the joint and base metal occurs which affects the microstructure and mechanical properties of the joint . Therefore, determining the critical bonding temperature is necessary to avoid the related deleterious effects.	0
Lee et al.  experimentally found that the holding time decreases by increasing the bonding temperature & decreasing the interlayer thickness, while bonding Inconel 718 & Inconel 625 using BNi-2 as interlayer material. The joint structure was analysed using SEM & EDS and found that the use of the interlayer material in bonding Zr-Sn-Nb alloy and stainless steel using nickel interlayer reduces the crack & residual stress in the joint surface. Lower residual stress and crack free reaction layer increases the strength of the joint  and the joining of dissimilar material combination such as copper with alumina using nano Al/Ni multilayer as interlayer can produce joint at low temperature with high strength. SEM, XRPD & DSC analysis  reveal that when compared with soldering & brazing techniques, Transient Liquid Phase (TLP) bonding technique produces joint with good thermal stability at high temperature and this is illustrated using silicon nitride and Inconel 718 joint using multiple interlayers . It is to be noted that the bonding of alumina using ABA core layer with in cladding layer provide high strength at low temperature . On the other hand, the same base metal has more strength joint than dissimilar metals and so the refractory core/element is used to reduce/remove the residual stress. Experimental work had good agreement with numerical simulation results generated through finite element based software .	0
In the present work, experimental investigation has been carried out the influence of bonding temperature on the strength and mechanical properties of SiC/Cu joints using Transient Liquid Phase (TLP) bonding technique. Various bonding temperature were examined and the time to complete isothermal solidification at different temperature was obtained. The desired temperature (230°C) was determined, because it is a significant parameter for manufacturing the Compact Linear Collider's in nuclear industry to obtain the quality joints by using Transient Liquid Phase (TLP) bonding process.	0
The Transient Liquid Phase (TLP) bonding process requires a dedicated setup to perform the experimentation. As this process involves heating, axial loading and cooling, a dedicated setup has been developed as shown in . The setup consists of heating chamber, cooling channel, single phase VARIAC, axial loading (indigenous) system etc. The heating chamber is made up of mild steel plates with fireclay brick insulation, the heating element used in the chamber is the nichrome coil controlled by single phase VARIAC. The single-phase auto transformer (C10ASPT) could be operated under the input voltage range of 20–500V AC and the input current of 0.1–10Amps. A ram is employed to apply the axial pressure up to 3MPa to the specimen. The cooling channel is used for sudden quenching of the specimen at the end of the process. The temperature inside the chamber is monitored using the thermocouple and digital indicator.	0
Experiments were carried out in an in-house made Transient Liquid Phase (TLP) bonding setup as described above. The experimentation is carried out by varying the bonding temperature in suitable increments [Ref No. 201641019625]. Initially the specimen to be bonded consisting of SiC and Cu along with the interlayer (Lead) is kept inside the chamber as shown in . Once the specimen is kept inside the heating chamber, the ram is to be lowered. The thermocouples are placed at their respective positions and the axial pressure of 1.75MPa is applied. The heating element is switched ‘ON’ and the specimen is heated up to 262°C temperature as shown in . Once that the temperature is reached the heating element is switched ‘OFF’. The specimen is then taken out and quenched in water and naturally aging at room temperature which the Transient Liquid Phase (TLP) bonded SiC-Cu specimen as shown in the .	1
The  given below provides the details of the experimental conditions during bonding of SiC and Copper. The experimental results obtained during experimentation are given in .	0
Mechanical testing (shear test) is carried out to evaluate the shear strength of the bonded joints by means of shear testing machine at room temperature. 20×20×30mm shear test specimen is prepared. The shear tests were carried out using a tensile test machine. Shear tool height of 80µm and shear speed 80µm/s were applied during the test. During shear test, the bonded specimen was placed on the sleeve tube. The sample holder was intersected on the bonded interface line. While, applied force on the sample holder was used to apply shear stress on the joint as shown in . For SEM examination, the bonded samples were sectioned using abrasive water jet machining and to get the clean surface. The surface to be prepared for microstructural analysis is polished using a graded sequence of abrasive materials. The first step involves coarse grinding using abrasives of 60–180 grit. A common sequence uses 120, 240, 320, 400, and 600 grit abrasive papers. This categorization may be modified depending on the initial surface roughness and the hardness of the material. These grinding steps are usually carried out wet to prevent heating of the specimen and to promote a better surface finish. Polishing or lapping the sample is done with abrasives having particle average size of 30µm for coarse polishing of the specimen. The final grinding and polishing is done to obtain a flat, scratch-free surface with a high reflectivity surface. The etchant reveals the microstructure of the specimen through a selective dissolution of the microstructural constituents. The specimen should be thoroughly cleaned after each stage to avoid having abrasive materials embedded in pores and cracks of the specimen. The microstructural observations were carried out using Hitachi, SU1510-Japan scanning electron microscope (SEM) was done on the specimen. Variations in micro hardness across the bonded joint, is studied using Vickers hardness tester. Micro hardness measurements were taken across the joint interface using a load of 5kg and a holding time of 20s on an indent were made on the bonded specimen. The indenter is then removed from the surface of the specimen and the indentation dimensions were measured using an optical microscope.	1
 shows how the yield strength of SiC/Cu joint varies for different bonding temperatures such as 161°C, 230°C and 262°C. As can be realized, yield strength increased with increasing bonding time for different bonding temperatures. The increase in joint strength was accredited to removal of the eutectics at the joint interface during isothermal solidification. However, there is a bonding time for each bonding temperature required to remove the eutectics and improve the joint strength. In , the effect of bonding temperature on joint yield strengths shows that the yield strength increased with bonding temperature to a maximum value of 0.1785e3 N with a displacement of 1mm at 230°C, 0.158 e3 N with a displacement of 1mm at 262°C and 0.1e3 N with a displacement of 1mm at 161°C respectively. The interface was found to be stable during shear testing. However, in the case of the SiC/Cu with lead interlayer, weak shear force was found in other specimens. This is due to higher bonding temperature (262°C) between lead and copper. The backside metallization itself was found to be stable during the Transient Liquid Phase (TLP) bonding process. However, joints made in 262°C shows a significant reduction in shear strength. Liquefaction at this temperature caused by mixing of SiC with lead interlayer produces the boundary layer with in the region. Further higher bonding temperature leads to reduce the bonding mechanism during the fracture of the SiC/Cu joint. The mechanism of joining could be further explained using Fick's law of diffusion.	0
The analytical solution to Fick's second law of diffusion can be used for the diffusion of melting point depressants out of the interlayer and into the base metal during bonding .f (s, t) is the concentration of melting point depressants elements as a function of distance (s) from the center of the interlayer and time (t), f0 is the initial melting point depressants element concentration in the interlayer and C is the diffusion coefficient of melting point depressants elements in the base metal. Eq.  shows that at constant time, f(s) is reversely related to C which increases with increasing temperature. Therefore, reduction of melting point depressants element concentration in any zones with increasing temperature to 230°C is in agreement with this relationship.	0
Models based on the diffusion induced solid/liquid interface motion have been used in estimating time that is required to complete isothermal solidification. In these models, the time is approximated bywhere C, 2k and ϑ are the diffusion coefficients of the melting point depressants element in the solid base metal, the maximum width of the molten interlayer at its equilibration at solid/liquid interface and dimensionless parameter respectively. Eq.  represents, ts as a function of melting point depressants element diffusivity in the solid base metal and the phase relationships between the interlayer and the base metal, both of which are dependent on bonding temperature.	0
Increasing diffusion bonding temperature promotes mass transfer of alloying elements across the interface, which is responsible for the increase in volume fraction of the reaction products enhances joint strength. Increasing the bonding temperature revealed that the dissolution of the interlayer occurred due to the partial diffusion of the alloying elements and consequently the joint strength improves from 3.27 to 5.24MPa when the temperature is raised from 161°C to 230°C respectively. Increase in micro hardness at the interface is also observed, which can be attributed to refined grains due to recrystallization. But, when the temperature is further increased to 262°C, hardness of the intermetallic compound increases leading to more tendency of becoming brittle. Hence, strength of the joint declines when the bonding temperature is increased to 262°C. Hot molten lead suddenly drops down and becomes red and very brittle.	0
Micro hardness values were measured at the joints consists of three distinct zones such as fully diffusion zone, partially diffusion zone and unaffected regions in both dissimilar materials at various bonding temperatures as given in . The hardness values are compared against different bonding temperatures. The hardness at the partially diffusion zone is high and the hardness of phases at the joint and fully diffusion zone is low with increasing temperature up to 230°C as shown in . At higher temperatures, the rate of elements diffusion between the base metal and the joint is higher. This can prevent the formation of eutectics at the joint and increase the partially diffusion zone hardness due to solid state strengthening. The results show that the property of the interlayer material is affected and so its micro hardness value is very low from its parent material value. Whereas, for the two base materials, the hardness value is relatively equal to the hardness before bonding. Hence the property of the parent material is preserved in the Transient Liquid Phase (TLP) bonding process. As the property of the parent material is not affected, the stress induced will be very low and the strength will be improved at the diffused zone.	0
From the experimental results shown in , it is clearly shown that bonding temperature plays a prominent role in determining the shear strength of SiC/Cu joints. For bonding temperature 161°C, shear strength was determined as 3.27MPa. It is lower due to the increase in the joint width and the occurrence of intermetallic compounds formation at the bonded interface. Further increase of the bonding temperature value to 230°C, resulted in an increase in the shear strength value to 5.24MPa, which could be attributed to lower tendency of intermetallic compounds formation of the alloying elements. When the temperature was further raised to 262°C the joint strength was slightly decreased to a value of 5MPa. A maximum value of 5.24MPa shear strength was achieved for the Transient liquid phase (TLP) bonding process specimen produced at the bonding temperature of 230°C as shown in . Higher shear strength was related to the higher rate of the isothermal solidification at the higher bonding temperature.	0
While examining the SEM micrograph of the bonded specimen as shown in , the three regions were observed such as fully diffused zone, partially diffused zone and no diffused zone. In Transient Liquid Phase Bonding (TLPB) process, the lead has a low melting point when compared to parent materials SiC and Cu. At bonding temperature of 230°C the lead readily diffuses into the SiC parent metal, through the porous present in SiC particles which results in fully diffused zone lead forms boundaries over SiC grains till a distance of 1.5mm from the diffusion zone. a Micrograph showing interface of SiC/Cu joint at a magnification of 650 X While increasing the bonding temperature further, interlayer melts and effuses out instead of diffusing into the parent materials. b Micrograph showing Diffusion of lead into SiC at a magnification of 2000 X in the partially diffused region, recrystallization has taken place and reductions in grain size were observed than the grains in the unaffected parent materials. c Micrograph showing Copper the interface at a magnification of 2000 X the SiC particles close to the bond zone were reduced into the size of ultra-fine grains. This is due to the breaking up of the SiC particles during pressure . These ultra-fine grains found at the interfacial region resulted in increase of micro hardness value at the bond interface. d Micrograph showing Lead at the interfacial region between Copper and SiC at a magnification of 200X the size of the ultra-fine grains is of the range of 300–600nm. Reduction in grain size results in improved joint strengths according to Hall patch's relation. SiC particles appear as light grey spots in the bond interface.	0
Joining feasibility of SiC and Cu with interlayer was tried out using Transient Liquid Phase Bonding (TLPB) technique. The bonding temperature was varied and its influence on joint strength was explored. Following conclusions can be drawn from the experimental study.	0
It was observed that the specimen bonded at 230°C could shear an ultimate load of 1.77MPa, while the specimen bonded at 161°C could shear ultimate load of 1MPa. This can be attributed to the dissolution of the interlayer due to the partial diffusion of the alloying elements.	0
Micro hardness profile shows decrease in hardness value at the fully diffused zone of the interfacial region. This is due to the plastic deformation caused by pressure and increase in temperature.	0
Micro structural examinations reveal three separate zones namely fully diffused zone, partially diffused zone and unaffected base material zone. Ultra-fine dynamically recrystallized grains of about 341nm are observed at the fully diffused zone. Reduction in grain size enhances joint strengths.	0
The shear strength at complete diffused zone increased with increasing bonding temperature up to 230°C and significant reduction was observed for specimens bonded at 262°C. Decrease in shear strength is due to the very brittle interface formed at higher temperature.	0
Though, the present work shows that SiC and copper can be bonded with lead interlayer successfully using Transient Liquid Phase (TLP) Bonding, further experimentation is to be conducted to arrive at optimal process conditions for promising SiC/Cu joints.	0
The authors grateful for the financial grant by  (Autonomous), Sivakasi, under Students Project Scheme (Vide Letter No.: OF/EDC/2839/2015-2016 dated 24.10.2015). The authors acknowledge the support and encouragement by Dr.S.Arivazhagan, Principal and Dr.P.Nagaraj, Head of Mechanical Engineering, towards this work.	0
For high-temperature applications, such as fossil-fuel-power plants, ferritic steels are more advantageous than austenitic steels and Ni-based superalloys, due to their low cost, high thermal conductivity, and low thermal expansion []. However, their industrial applications were limited to the relatively low-temperature environment (lower than 900 K), due to the microstructural instability, i.e., the coarsening of the incoherent strengthening carbides/nitrides during the long-term exposure to elevated temperatures, which degrades the creep resistance [,]. A new type of Fe-Cr-Ni-Al ferritic steels reinforced by a B2-NiAl precipitate has seen a recent increase of interest as a potential candidate for high-temperature applications because of their promising creep resistance [,]. These Fe-Cr-Ni-Al alloys consist of an ordered B2-NiAl precipitate (designated as β′) distributed in a disordered body-centered-cubic (BCC) α-Fe matrix, and these two phases have a small difference in the lattice parameters, thus, coherent α/β′ microstructure, which is analogous to that of γ/γ′ Ni-based superalloys []. The coherent β′ precipitate plays a crucial role in the creep properties of the α/β′ Fe-Cr-Ni-Al alloys [].	0
It has been reported that further improvement of the creep resistance of the α/β′ Fe-Cr-Ni-Al alloys can be achieved by introducing a nano-scale L21-Ni2TiAl phase into the B2-NiAl precipitate [,]. Such a two-phase precipitate consisting of a fine network of B2-NiAl and L21-Ni2TiAl phases is referred to as a hierarchical structure []. The microstructure evolution of the hierarchically-structured B2-NiAl/L21-Ni2TiAl precipitates-strengthened ferritic alloy has been investigated according to thermal treatment []. It was observed that the thermal treatment results in the morphological change from fine to coarse structures within the precipitate, which also affects the morphology and spatial distribution of the precipitates []. It was reported that the microstructural transition was associated with the elastic strain, which is influenced by the interface structure between the precipitate and matrix []. Thus, the morphological change is expected to affect the degree of the elastic strain, thus, creep behavior. However, limited studies have been conducted regarding the microstructure and creep resistance at temperatures above 973 K.	0
In the present research, we conducted the investigation on the microstructures and creep-deformation behavior of the two-phase NiAl/Ni2TiAl precipitate-strengthened ferritic alloy, according to various thermal treatments. Systematic aging treatments at temperatures above 973 K were carried out to confirm the formation of the hierarchical structure and the morphological change of the precipitate. Moreover, creep tests were conducted at 1033 K in the stress range of 50–150 MPa, which allows us to understand the role of the precipitate structures (i.e., coherent/semi-coherent interface, elastic strain) on the creep resistance. Based on the modified version of the creep-power-law equation for precipitate-strengthened alloys, it was found that the threshold stress is dependent upon the precipitate interface structures.	0
The model alloy has a nominal composition of Fe-6.5Al-10Cr-10Ni-2Ti-3.4Mo-0.25Zr-0.005B in weight percent (wt%). An ingot of the alloy with a dimension of 12.7 × 25.4 × 1.9 cm3 was prepared by the Sophisticated Alloys, Inc., using the vacuum-induction-melting facility. Hot isostatic pressing (HIP) was applied to the ingot at 1473 K and 100 MPa for 4 h in order to reduce casting defects. The alloys were homogenized at 1473 K for 0.5 h. Four different aging treatments were carried out to introduce distinct precipitate sizes, specifically, (1) at 1053 K for 1 h, and at 1073 K for (2) 1 h, (3) 5 h, and (4) 50 h, respectively.	1
Scanning-electron microscopy (SEM) was conducted, using a Zeiss Auriga 40 equipped with an Everhart-Thornley secondary-electron detector. The SEM images were analyzed, using the ImageJ software to obtain the sizes of the precipitates [], and the average values were estimated, employing more than 200 particles. Thin foils for conventional transmission-electron-microscopy (CTEM) observations were prepared by electropolishing, followed by ion milling at an ion energy of ~2.5 kV and an incident angle of ±~5°. The transmission-electron-microscopy (TEM) specimens were cooled by liquid N2 during ion milling. The TEM observations were conducted with a Zeiss Libra 200 MC TEM/STEM. The TEM images were acquired at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV.	1
Tension-creep samples were machined with a gage diameter of 3.175 mm and a gage length of 28 mm. The samples were heated in a three-zone furnace, with the temperature controlled within 1 K by a thermocouple placed within 10 mm of the sample. Tension-creep tests were conducted at 1033 K under a constant load (at stresses ranging from 50 to 150 MPa). Extension in the specimens was measured, using a linear variable displacement transducer (LVDT) with a resolution of 10 μm. The applied load was increased when a well-defined minimum strain rate was observed. The cumulative creep strain per sample was kept well below the value where necking might occur. Strain rates at a given stress were estimated by measuring the slope of the strain vs. time in the steady-state creep regime.	1
 shows the micrographs of the Fe-Cr-Ni-Al-Ti alloy specimens aged at (a)–(b) 1053 K and (c)–(d) 1073 K for 1 h. The SEM image in (a) displays that the sample contains cuboidal precipitates with an average width of 81.8 nm and length of 108.6 nm. Note that the size of the precipitates was estimated, based on the rectangular or elliptical shape, and the averaged sizes are summarized in . Moreover, it can be seen that the precipitates are closely arranged to each other, and are preferentially aligned along certain orientations. The dark-field (DF) TEM image in (b) was obtained along the [100] zone axis, using (020) reflection, which shows the formation of narrow bright nano-zones within the precipitates, as denoted by white arrows. The microstructure of the current Fe-Cr-Ni-Al-Ti alloy upon aging at 973 K has been examined, using TEM and atom probe tomography (APT), which confirmed the formation of the nano-scale B2-type NiAl zones within the parent L21-type Ni2TiAl precipitates [,]. Note that the super-lattice reflection employed to form the DF-TEM images in (b) is common to both the B2 and L21 structures [(001)-B2 and (002)-L21]. However, by considering the image intensity, and structure factor [], the narrow bands inside the precipitates are the B2-NiAl phase, while the surrounding regions are the L21-Ni2TiAl phase. It is worth noting that the matrix/precipitate interfaces are devoid of misfit dislocations, which implies the coherent interface between the precipitate and matrix.	0
It is well known that the morphological and spatial features of the precipitates are strongly affected by the interface and strain energies at the precipitate/matrix interface []. Specifically, when the interface energy dominates (equivalently, small sizes of precipitates), the stable shape of the precipitate becomes spherical, as observed in B2-NiAl strengthened ferritic alloys []. In contrast, when the strain energy becomes more influential than the interface energy (i.e., large sizes of precipitates), the equilibrium morphology of the precipitate becomes cuboidal, as observed in Ni-based superalloys []. Therefore, the cuboidal shape of the precipitate in  reflects the significant effect of the strain energy, thus, a high magnitude of the strain field around the precipitates. Furthermore, this high effect of the strain field also results in the distance-dependent elastic interaction between precipitates (long distance: attractive, short distance: repulsive) [,,], which is associated with the short separation and preferential alignment of the precipitates.	0
The slight increase in the aging temperature from 1053 K to 1073 K while keeping the aging time (1 h) leads to similar precipitate structures, such as cuboidal shape, close separation, and preferential alignment, but induces a slight increment of the precipitate size, as shown in (c). As the extent of the elastic strain around the misfitting precipitate depends on the precipitate size, the larger size of the precipitate in (c) is expected to result in the more enhanced elastic-strain field than (a). The TEM image in (d) confirms the presence of the fine hierarchical structure in the precipitates, as shown in (b). In addition, dark contrast zones inside the precipitates are often observed as indicated by red arrows in (d). Based on our previous studies regarding the microstructural characterization of the current alloy via the transmission-electron microscopy (TEM) energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analysis [,], the dark zones are believed to be an Fe-rich inclusion.	0
A longer aging treatment (50 h) at 1073 K was conducted to further increase the precipitate size, and the SEM and TEM micrographs are presented in (a) and (b). (a) shows the SEM micrograph of the specimen aged at 1073 K for 50 h. The precipitate size considerably increases (an average width of 326.0 nm and length of 595.1 nm). However, as the size increases, a marked transition of the precipitate structures is observed. First, the precipitate is changed to an elongated and round shape. Second, spatial features of the precipitates in (a) seem less apparent than ones in . The transition of the precipitate attributes is related to the precipitate interface structure and the level of the elastic strain. The previous investigation on the microstructural evolution of the Fe-Cr-Ni-Al-Ti alloy according to the thermal treatment at 973 K revealed that the transition of the morphological and spatial features occurs simultaneously with the change of the interface structure and internal precipitate structure []. Indeed, the BF-STEM TEM image in (b) reveals the semi-coherent interface with a high density of misfit dislocations around the precipitates, and the DF-TEM image in the inset of (b) demonstrates the coarse internal structure of the precipitate. The misfit dislocations form as a result of the interface strain energy exceeding the critical level, which leads to a release of the elastic strain, thus a reduction of the strain field around the precipitate [], as compared to those of the coherently-misfitting precipitates in . Furthermore, the reduced effect of the strain field accordingly affects the spatial distribution of the precipitates [], specifically the coalescence of the neighboring precipitates.	0
To achieve the optimized precipitate structure in terms of the maximized level of the elastic strain, additional heat-treatments were conducted at 1073 K between 1 and 50 h to obtain the critical precipitate size with the coherent interface. Based on the additional heat-treatments and microstructural characterization, the optimized precipitate structure was acquired from the aging treatment at 1073 K for 5 h, as shown in (c) and (d). The SEM image in (c) displays the similar features of the precipitates, as observed in , but larger precipitate sizes. Note that few elongated precipitates are observed, as denoted by white arrows in (c), but the majority of the precipitates have a cuboidal morphology. The DF-TEM image in (d) confirms the coherency of the precipitate without the misfit dislocations and the effect of the elastic strain field on the distribution of the precipitates.	0
Tension creep tests at 1033 K were conducted on the aged specimens, which cover a wide range of strain rates from 10−6 to 10−9 s−1, as shown in . Based on the microstructural observation, the tested samples can fall into two groups, such as coherent and semi-coherent precipitates. For example, the samples aged at 1053 K for 1 h (black square) and 1073 K for 1 (red circle) and 5 h (blue triangle) contain the coherent precipitates with the different sizes, and the precipitate size was shown to increase accordingly (). As the size of the coherent precipitate increases, the steady-state creep rate is gradually reduced, and the minimum creep rate was obtained with the sample aged at 1073 K for 5 h. In contrast, the creep rate of the sample aged at 1073 K for 50 h (green reverse triangle), which contains the semi-coherent precipitates, considerably increases by one order of magnitude, compared to that of the sample aged at 1073 K for 5 h. In precipitate-strengthened alloys, the strain rate can be defined by the modified version of the creep equation [],where B is a constant, μ is the shear modulus of the matrix, b is the Burger's vector in the matrix, D is the effective diffusivity of a controlled element in the matrix, σa is the applied stress, σth is the threshold stress, and n is the stress exponent of the matrix. The threshold stress at strain rates above 1 × 10−8 s−1, estimated by a linear least-squares regression of ε̇1/n vs. σa − σth with n = 4, is about 50 MPa for 1053 K/1 h, 56 MPa for 1073 K/1 h, 58 MPa for 1073 K/5 h, 35 MPa for 1073 K/50 h, respectively. The dotted lines indicates the fitting of the experimental creep data using Eq. .	0
The current microstructural examination and creep tests demonstrated the significance of the elastic-strain field on the creep properties of the Fe-Cr-Ni-Al-Ti alloy. The extent of the elastic strain increases with increasing the coherent precipitate size, whereas the elastic strain is reduced when the precipitate becomes semi-coherent. The significance of the coherent elastic strain on the creep resistance has been investigated via experimental and theoretical approaches []. For example, more dilute AlSc alloys comprising of coherent L12-Al3Sc precipitates exhibits an increase of the creep threshold stress with increasing the precipitate radius. This study suggested that the elastic strain plays an important role in enhancing the elastic interaction between the precipitate and mobile dislocations, thus reducing the creep rate of the alloy []. The same strengthening effect is expected in the current Fe-Cr-Ni-Al-Ti alloy.	0
In the present study, the isothermal treatments were employed to control the hierarchical structures (fine or coarse internal networks), which demonstrates the effectiveness of the fine hierarchical structure within the precipitate on the creep resistance. It is expected that the volume fraction and composition of the constitutive phases depend on thermal treatment temperatures []. Therefore, it is believed that the multiple-step heat treatments composed of different aging temperatures could allow the further optimization of the hierarchical structure. Moreover, there was experimental investigation to control the precipitate structures, such as volume fractions and compositions of the constitutive phases, via fine-tuning the Ti content, which revealed that the Fe-Cr-Ni-Al-Ti alloy containing the highest volume fraction ratio of L21/B2 provides the best creep resistance than those with less ratios [,]. This study also emphasized the importance of the strain field at the precipitate/matrix interface, which makes the dislocation climb bypass more difficult. Consequently, we believe that the elastic-strain effect controlled by the hierarchical structure within the precipitate should be considered as an important parameter to improve the creep resistance of the hierarchically-structured two-phase precipitate-strengthened ferritic superalloys.	0
In summary, systematic thermal treatments and creep experiments were performed to study the effect of the precipitate structures, such as the size, internal structure within the precipitate, and interface coherency, on the creep resistance of the hierarchically-structured B2-NiAl/L21-Ni2TiAl precipitate-strengthened ferritic superalloy. The fine network within the precipitate retains the coherent matrix/precipitate interface, whereas the coarse internal network results in a transition to a semi-coherent interface. The interface transition was observed with the heat-treatment at 1073 K for more than 5 h. The creep threshold stress of the coherent-precipitate-containing samples gradually increases from 50 to 58 MPa, as the precipitate size increases, while that of the semi-coherent-precipitate-containing sample is reduced to 35 MPa. It was found that the improved creep resistance is attributed to the high level of the coherent elastic strain around the fine hierarchical precipitate.	0
The research is supported by the Department of Energy (DOE),  Program, United States, under Grants of DE- (Mr. R. Dunst and Dr. V. Cedro, program managers).	0
Dispersoids and precipitates in UFG René 88DT was systematically studied.	0
TiN and Y4Al2O9 particles are thermally stable in UFG René 88DT.	0
High thermal stability of the UFG structure was achieved by dispersoids formation.	0
Bulk nanocrystalline (NC, grain sizes < 100 nm) and ultrafine-grained (UFG, grain sizes 100–1000 nm) superalloys have attracted considerable attention in recent years due to their tremendous room temperature strength relative to their coarse-grained (CG) counterparts []. Although the microstructure of NC/UFG superalloys is quite stable [,], it is still necessary to further improve their thermal stability so as to improve performance under high temperature conditions. Nanoparticle strengthening has been demonstrated to be a promising approach as nanoparticles would inhibit dislocation movement and grain boundary sliding and migration in both NC/UFG metals and CG metals at elevated temperatures []. For example, thermally stable oxide nanoparticles such as Y2O3 nanoparticles have been used in CG oxide dispersion strengthened (ODS) superalloys to successfully improve their elevated temperature mechanical properties by effectively pinning dislocations [].	0
High energy mechanical milling (HEMM) is known as an effective method to uniformly disperse oxide (e.g. Y2O3) nanoparticles into superalloys, and can also fabricate NC superalloy powders concurrently []. Depending on the powder consolidation technique and condition used, the final superalloy products could have grain sizes ranging from hundreds of nanometers to tens of micrometers. However, during HEMM and powder consolidation process, the dispersed nanoparticles themselves are not sufficiently stable to survive in alloy matrices. In Y2O3 nanoparticle-dispersion strengthened superalloys and steels, Y2O3 nanoparticles usually combine with aluminum, titanium and some other active alloying elements to form complex Y-M-O oxide nanoparticles such as Y-Al-O, Y-Ti-O, Y-Hf-O, and Y-Zr-O []. The active alloying elements in the superalloys can also influence the size, morphology and crystal structure of the Y-M-O nanoparticles formed. On the other hand, the interaction between Y2O3 and alloying elements in superalloys can also have a major effect on γ′ precipitation during heat treatment. In an early work on ODS superalloys, Benjamin et al. [] suggested that the contents of the active alloying elements—such as aluminum, titanium, and niobium—should be greatly reduced to lower their effect on oxide formation in ODS superalloys. Furthermore, the consumption of γ′ forming elements such as aluminum and titanium could have a major effect on γ′ precipitation during heat treatment. Therefore, ODS nickel-based superalloys are usually designed to either contain only a small percentage of aluminum, titanium, and niobium (for γ′ precipitate-free type alloys), or to contain only a large percentage of aluminum (for γ′ precipitate-strengthened type alloys).	0
Moreover, in recent years, newly designed superalloys—such as RR1000, N18, René 104, and MERL-76—have increasingly come to contain more titanium than aluminum, based on the fact that the strength of γ′ precipitates can be significantly increased by adding more titanium and thereby increasing the antiphase boundary (APB) energy of γ′ precipitates []. However, although there has been much research on dispersoids and γ′ precipitates in aluminum-rich oxide-strengthened superalloys in the past few decades, there has not, to the best of the authors' knowledge, been any research published to date on γ′ precipitates and dispersoids in titanium-rich oxide-strengthened superalloys. Hence, in this study, we investigated the microstructure of an UFG titanium-rich René 88DT-5vol.%Y2O3 alloy to elucidate the characteristics of γ′ precipitates and dispersoids in it, as well as its other microstructural features. In terms of weight, the titanium content of René 88DT is about 150% of its aluminum content []. René 88DT is a γ′ precipitate-strengthened, powder-metallurgy, nickel-based superalloy which is widely used in the aviation industry for manufacturing turbine disks.	0
This study attempts to provide insight into the formation of Y-M-O dispersoids and other dispersoids in a titanium-rich UFG René 88DT-5vol.%Y2O3 alloy, as well as to elucidate their effects on the thermal stability of the matrix and γ′ precipitate formation during heat treatment. The UFG René 88DT-5vol.%Y2O3 alloy was fabricated through consolidation of a HEMMed powder mixture consisting of René 88DT alloy powder and Y2O3 nanoparticle powder. Subsequently, microstructural characterization on γ′ precipitates and dispersoids was carried out.	0
An René 88DT powder (particle sizes: 150–300 μm) was fabricated with the plasma rotating electrode process (PREP) at Central Iron and Steel Research Institute (CISRI) in China. The nominal composition of this nickel-based alloy in weight percentage is: 13%Co, 16%Cr, 4%Mo, 4%W, 2.1%Al, 3.7%Ti, 0.7%Nb, 0.03%C and 0.015%B []. The alloy powder was blended with 5 vol.% of Y2O3 nanopowder (average particle size: ~30 nm), and then the powder blend was mechanically milled using a planetary ball milling machine for 48 h in which has a pause for 15 min every 3 h for cooling with a ball to powder ratio (BPR) of 10 and a speed of 500 rpm in hardened steel vials under argon. No process control agent (usually stearic acid) was added into the powder in order to avoid increasing the C conent of the alloy. The as-received René 88DT and as-milled René 88DT-5vol.%Y2O3 powders were consolidated thermomechanically using a procedure involving spark plasma sintering (SPS),to make two cylindrical SPSed powder compacts with a diameter of 40 mm and height of about 35 mm. The SPS was conducted in an SPS furnace HPD-25 produced by FCT company, Germany using a graphite die at 1150 °C and with a pressure of 75 MPa and a holding time of 10 min. The SPSed powder compacts were then hot extruded in sealed steel cans to make rods at 1120 °C and an extrusion ratio of 4. The as-extruded samples were heat treated with a solution treatment at 1120 °C for 2 h followed by air cooling (AC) and then aging at 760 °C for 16 h followed again by AC. The microstructures of the as-extruded and as-heat treated (HTed) samples were characterized using a Rigaku Ulotima IV X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with Cu Kα radiation, a JEOL JEM-2800 transmission electron microscope (TEM), and a FEI Quanta 3d scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with a transmission Kikuchi diffraction (TKD) detector. The TEM and SEM/TKD specimens were prepared by mechanical dimpling and ion beam milling. Electrolytic polish and electrolytic etch process was used to characterize γ′ precipitates in this study. The solutions of electrolytic polishing and electrolytic etching were 8 ml HClO4 + 92 ml C2H5OH solution and 85 ml H3PO4 + 5 ml H2SO4 + 8 g CrO3 solution, respectively, and the process parameters of them were 30 V for 25 s and 5 V for 3 s, respectively. The René 88DT and René 88DT-5vol.%Y2O3 sample is denoted as R88 and R88-5Y, respectively.	1
 show the microstructure of HTed R88 alloy sample characterized using different techniques. As shown in (a), the grain sizes of the HTed R88 alloy sample were in the range of 20–60 μm, and there were some lines of oxide or carbide particles aligned with the extrusion direction in the microstructure. These particles are likely the oxide or carbide particles at the prior particle boundaries [] which have been overcome by the formation of new grain boundaries during recrystallization. As shown in (b), the microstructure of the HTed R88 alloy sample contained 40% volume fraction γ′ precipitates distributed uniformly in the microstructure which well matched with previous publication [], implying that the sample has been well heat treated. In (c), the SEM SE feature of deeply etched sample shows γ′ precitates had irregular rounded shapes and sizes of 100–150 nm. As the matrix has been removed by etching, the image shows γ′ precipitates settled from a volume of the material starting from the surface to a certain depth in the sample, so it seems there is almost completely γ′ precipitate. As shown in , the γ′ precipitates were rich in nickel, aluminum and titanium and poor in chrome and cobalt, and a typical second-phase particle with a size of about 300 nm was embedded in the matrix. As indicated in , the topography image combined with elemental mapping of titanium, aluminum, tungsten, carbon and oxygen shows that some of the (Ti, Nb, W)C particles had Al-rich oxide cores.	0
The TEM bright field images, TKD inverse pole figure (IPF) contrast map, and grain size distributions of as-extruded and HTed R88-5Y alloy samples are shown in . The two samples both had an UFG microstructure consisting of equiaxed grains with sizes in the range of 10 to 500 nm for the as-extruded sample and 10 to 550 nm for the HTed sample. The average grain size of the as-extruded sample was 122 nm, and the average grain size of the sample only increased slightly to 145 nm after heat treatment, despite the very high solution treatment temperature of 1120 °C—which is 0.85Tm, where Tm is the solidus temperature of nickel-based superalloy in Kelvin—and the substantially long time of 2 h. This shows that the UFG microstructure of the as-extruded sample had an outstanding thermal stability.	0
 shows the XRD patterns of the HTed R88 sample and the as-extruded and HTed R88-5Y samples. Besides the peaks of γ/γ′ phase, the XRD patterns of the as-extruded and HTed R88-5Y alloy samples also showed the peaks of Y4Al2O9 and TiN phases formed during powder consolidation and heat treatment which did not appear in the XRD pattern of the HTed R88 alloy sample. As shown in , the main peaks of the γ/γ′ phase in the XRD patterns of the HTed R88 and HTed R88-5Y samples were 43.6° and 43.85° respectively, indicating that the lattice parameter of the γ/γ′ phase decreased slightly, possibly because of the change of the Ti and Al contents in the solution due to the addition of Y2O3.	0
As shown in , the dispersoids in both as-extruded and HTed R88-5Y samples were rounded and equiaxed, and most of them were very small having sizes ranging ~5–50 nm. A small fraction of the particles was clearly larger and more cubic than the others, with sizes being up to ~150 nm. As marked in (c), the selected area electron diffraction patterns (SADPs) of a larger area of the HTed R88-5Y sample showed the diffraction rings of TiN and Y4Al2O9.	0
 shows the scanning transmission electron (STEM) image and EDS elemental mapping of major elements of the HTed R88-5Y sample. It can be seen from this microstructural characterization that all titanium was combined with nitrogen, forming relatively large particles. Yttrium and oxygen displayed the same distribution pattern, while no other element except aluminum segregated in the same areas, implying that the smaller nanoparticles (as indicated by the red arrows in ) were only Y-Al oxide. As indicated by the blue arrows in , there were Al rich zones other than the Y-Al oxide nanoparticles, these were also rich in nickel, implying they were γ′ precipitates. They were equiaxed and about 20–30 nm in diameter. It is worth noting that a small number of yttrium oxide nanoparticles remained in the matrix. As indicated by the green arrow in (f), a nanoparticle was rich in yttrium and oxygen but poor in aluminum. Chrome, cobalt, molybdenum and tungsten were in the solid solution of the nickel rich matrix.	0
 shows the SEM secondary electron (SE) images of the electrolytic polished and electrolytic etched surfaces of the HTed R88-5Y sample. As shown in (a), the SEM SE images of the electrolytic polished surface of the sample showed only dispersed particles. The γ′ precipitates became visible after electrolytic etching, as shown in (b). The majority of the γ′ precipitates in the HTed R88-5Y sample were 20–30 nm in diameter—which is much smaller than those in the plain R88 alloy which were 100–150 nm in diameter. The sizes of the γ′ precipitates revealed by the SEM SE images of the electrolytic etched surface of the HTed R88-5Y sample were consistent with the sizes of the Ni-Al rich zones revealed by the STEM-EDS mapping as shown in .  shows the TEM bright images of the microstructure of HTed R88-5Y alloy sample and the SADP of a matrix grain in the microstructure. Although the γ′ precipitates were not very clearly visible in the TEM images, the SADP of the grain did show weak superlattice diffraction spots which indicated that γ′ precipitates were present in the grains.	0
As shown in , some of the Y4Al2O9 nanoparticles were in the interior of the grains, while the others were located at the grain boundaries. The TiN particles were relatively large, and were found at the grain boundaries. The γ′ precipitates were not distinguishable in the bright STEM images due to the very weak contrast between the γ′ and γ phases.	0
 shows the size distributions of Y4Al2O9 nanoparticles in as-extruded and HTed R88-5Y alloy samples respectively. The average diameter of Y4Al2O9 nanoparticles in as-extruded and HTed R88-5Y alloy rods was 12.6 nm and 19.1 nm, respectively, implying that the Y4Al2O9 nanoparticles had a high thermal stability. On the other hand, the TiN particles had an even higher thermal stability, with their average size being unchanged at around 150 nm after heat treatment.	0
The results of this study clearly demonstrate that the Y2O3 nanoparticles added to the starting powder are dissolved and Y4Al2O9 is formed during HEMM and thermomechanical powder consolidation to produce the as-extruded R88-5Y sample.  shows the contents of aluminum, titanium, oxygen, nitrogen and Y2O3, Y/Al ratios and phases formed in a series of typical Y2O3 doped oxide dispersion strengthened (ODS) alloys. The Al2O3-Y2O3 system has four equilibrium Y-Al oxides which are Y4Al2O9 (YAM, monoclinic), Y3Al5O12 (YAG, garnet), YAlO3 (YAP, perovskite) and YAlO3 (YAH, hexagonal) [,], with the preferred Y-Al oxide formation depend on the Y/Al ratio []. In MA6000 alloy, the calculated Y/Al atomic ratio is 0.19, and all four Y-Al oxides can form [,]. However, in MA760 alloy, as the Y/Al atomic ratio decreases to 0.13, the phase with the lowest Y/Al atomic ratio, Y3Al5O12, becomes the only Y-Al oxide to form. In this study, R88-5Y has a very high Y/Al atomic ratio of 1.17 which is about six times of that of MA6000. This leads to formation of Y4Al2O9 because of the abundant supply of yttrium. A very small amount of Y2O3 nanoparticles is also detected in the microstructure of the as-extruded R88-5Y sample, as shown in . This confirms that the yttrium content is excessive for Y4Al2O9 formation.	0
Y4Al2O9 nanoparticles show good thermal stability during heat treatment, with the average size only increasing from 12.6 to 19.1 nm after holding at 1120 °C (0.85Tm) for 2 h followed by holding at 760 °C for 16 h. There are two major mechanisms for oxide nanoparticles in an ODS alloy to grow during heat treatment. If two or more kinds of oxide nanoparticles coexist in an ODS alloy, the system may move towards equilibrium by a dissolution-precipitation mechanism, as described using Eq. :where YxMyOz and YuMvOw represent two kinds of oxides. If the formation of YuMvOw can decrease the free energy of the system, the system will move to the right []. In this case, the heat treatment will cause one kind of oxide nanoparticles to disappear, and the other kind of oxide nanoparticles to grow. However, there is only one kind of Y-Al-O nanoparticle in the microstructure of the R88-5Y alloy sample prepared in this study, so the dissolution-precipitation mechanism would not operate during the heat treatment process.	0
The other mechanism for the growth of nanoparticles in alloys is Oswald ripening, which can be described by Eq. :where r¯t is the average particle size at time t, r¯0 is the average particle size at the beginning, D is the diffusion coefficient of solute atoms in the matrix, M is the molar mass of the particle, σ is the surface energy of particle/matrix, C is the concentration of solute atoms in the matrix, R is the gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, ρ is the density of the particle, and t is the duration of heat treatment []. It is generally held that oxides scarcely dissolve in alloys. That is to say that C is low, so according to Eq. , the Oswald coarsening rate of oxide particles is generally low. As shown in , the fraction of relatively large nanoparticles increased, meanwhile the fraction of relatively fine nanoparticles decreased, implying that some Y4Al2O9 nanoparticles may grow at the expense of other Y4Al2O9 nanoparticles. This phenomenon might indicate that the Oswald coarsening mechanism still operates to some extent during heat treatment of the R88-5Y alloy sample.	0
Although R88 is a titanium-rich type superalloy, no Y-Ti oxides are found in the microstructures of the as-extruded and HTed R88-5Y alloy samples. Fine TiN particles form instead of the Y-Ti oxide particles. As shown by the values of enthalpy of formation (ΔHf) of oxides and nitrides of aluminum and titanium listed in  [], formation of aluminum oxide is most preferred if the ODS alloy has Al present, and formation of titanium oxide can only happen if there is excess oxygen after forming aluminum oxide. ODS steels generally contain almost no aluminum, so that Y-Ti oxide nanoparticles form. Y-Ti oxide nanoparticles can also form in ODS superalloys. For example, Alloy 617 listed in  contains 1wt.%Al, and the formation of Al2O3 from the 1wt.%Al consumes 0.44wt.%O. Alloy 617 contained 0.59wt.%O which comes from the Y2O3 addition, suggesting that there is oxygen after the formation of Al2O3, and this oxygen can facilitate formation of TiO2 by combining with Ti present in the alloy, as confirmed in . In this study, the oxygen absorption of R88-5Y is well controlled, as listed in , and the amount of additional oxygen is far from enough for aluminum oxidization, which implies that YTi oxides cannot form.	0
As shown in , large TiN particles form along with Y4Al2O9 nanoparticles. This is because Y4Al2O9 nanoparticles usually form prior to TiN particles and the surfaces of Y4Al2O9 nanoparticles are possibly preferred sites for TiN nucleation.	0
The ability of dispersoids to impede grain boundary motion is related to the dispersoids' particle size. When grain boundaries leave a dispersed particle, the length of the grain boundary increases and the grain boundary energy increases consequently. Therefore, the larger the particle size, the greater the energy required. The broadened XRD pattern of the R88-5Y powder shown in  indicates that the grain size in R88-5Y powder was only tens of nanometers. During the thermomechanical powder consolidation process, the grain sizes increase to more than one hundred nanometers and the grain boundaries are effectively pinned by TiN particles and Y4Al2O9 nanoparticles. In the R88-5Y alloy, almost all the TiN particles are distributed at the grain boundaries, showing that the migration of grain boundaries is not capable of leaving the TiN particles behind, and they are very effective in inhibiting grain growth. However, a large portion of Y4Al2O9 nanoparticles are in the interior of grains, suggesting that Y4Al2O9 nanoparticles are not able to impede the grain boundary motion during the hot extrusion process.	0
Since a large fraction of aluminum and titanium are consumed by the formation of Y4Al2O9 nanoparticles and fine TiN particles during the preparation of the R88-5Y sample, their contents in the solid solution of the matrix is significantly decreased. This can cause the lattice parameter to decrease from 0.3585 nm for the base alloy to 0.3580 nm for the R88-5Y sample. As the lattice parameter of pure nickel is 0.3516 nm, the lattice distortion of R88-5Y alloy is not significantly changed by oxide and nitride formation, indicating that aluminum and titanium do not strongly affect the crystal structure of the γ matrix.	0
The γ′ precipitates in R88-5Y alloy are entirely different than those in R88 alloy. The chemical composition of γ′ precipitates in R88 alloy is Ni3(Ti, Al) as shown in , whereas the γ′ precipitates in R88-5Y alloy have almost no titanium, on account of the formation of TiN particles during fabrication. In addition, about 0.35wt.%Al had been consumed by the formation of Y4Al2O9, which amounted to about 20% of total aluminum content. The loss of nearly all of the titanium and one fifth of the aluminum of γ′ precipitates results in a lower volume fraction and particle size of γ′ precipitates.	0
The calculated γ′ contents of the R88 and R88-5Y alloys by JMatPro software are shown in . As the database does not contain yttrium, the yttrium and corresponding oxygen has been subtracted for calculation. The calculated γ′ precipitates fraction was 38.1% at the aging temperature of 760 °C which matches well with the empirical results available in publications [], implying that the calculation should be valid. The calculated value of γ′ precipitate content fell to 17.3% in the R88-5Y alloy while the initial precipitation temperature dropped down to 968 °C from 1120 °C. Beyond that, the particle size of γ′ precipitates has been suppressed to 20–30 nm, which results in dislocations preferring to cut through rather than bypass them. As the titanium has been taken away from γ′ precipitates, the APB energy should be theoretically greatly decreased[], implying that the resistance force when dislocations cut through the γ′ precipitates might be reduced. Therefore, the Y4Al2O9 and TiN particles should reinforce the matrix at elevated temperatures, but the reduction of fraction and particle size of γ′ precipitates and the loss of titanium would seriously reduce the γ′ precipitation strengthening effect.	0
The R88-5Y alloy had a notably more thermally stable UFG structure in this study than dispersoid-free superalloys, indicating that the dispersoids play important roles in inhibiting grain growth under elevated temperatures. The precipitation strengthened NC/UFG nickel base superalloy showed good thermal stability up to 0.46–0.62 Tm, this is contributed to by uniformly distributed coherent γ′ or γ″ precipitates within grains. However, these coherent precipitates softened and coarsened at elevated temperatures of 600–650 °C, hence the thermal stability of the microstructure becomes worse at temperatures past the γ′ precipitates’ softening temperature[,]. The Y4Al2O9 and TiN uniformly distributed in the matrix and the relatively large particles strongly impeded grain boundary movement while the finer particles embedded in the interior of grains prevented γ′ precipitates from coarsening. Sun reported that the NG structure Inconel 718 alloy was able to maintain the NC structure at 700 °C for 1 h, but the grains would quickly grow up to about 200 nm at 800 °C for 1 h []. In this study, the grain size of UFG structure R88-5Y alloy only slightly increased from 122 nm to 145 nm after heat treatment of 1120 °C/2 h and 760 °C/8 h, indicating that nanoparticles significantly enhance the thermal stability of UFG structure superalloys.	0
Bulk UFG R88-5vol.%Y2O3 alloy has been successfully fabricated by HEMM and thermomechanical consolidation of powder consolidation. The UFG microstructure and the Y4Al2O9 nanoparticles show a high thermal stability with the average grain and nanoparticle sizes only slightly increasing from 122 to 145 nm and from 12.6 to 19.1 nm, respectively, after undergoing the heat treatment of 1120 °C/2 h and 760 °C/16 h.	0
The dispersoids in the UFG R88-5vol.%Y2O3 alloy are Y4Al2O9 nanoparticles and TiN particles with average sizes of 19.1 nm and 150 nm, respectively. They two kinds of dispersoids are both thermally stable and effectively inhibit grain growth.	0
Due to the fact that a large fraction of available aluminum and nearly all of the titanium are consumed by the formation of dispersoids, the fraction of γ′ precipitates formed in the UFG microstructure of R88-5vol.%Y2O3 alloy is much lower than that in the heat treated R88 base alloy and their sizes are much smaller, being 20–30 nm compared to 100–150 nm, respectively.	0
This work was financially supported by the Joint fund of the  under Project No. , the  under Project No.  and , the  under Project No. .	0
The new method for single-grit grinding is applied to study the speed effect.	0
The critical thickness of chip formation was quantitatively analyzed.	0
The speed has a significant impact on high speed grinding process.	0
Speed effect provides new thoughts to understanding the high speed grinding mechanism.	0
Compared to conventional speed grinding, high speed grinding is widely employed for achieving good machining qualities combined with higher productivity, lower force on workpiece and longer tool life . In view of kinematic geometry, the distinction between conventional and high speed grinding is mainly due to the tinier chips produced from the speed effect. It is well known that grinding at a higher speed improves the efficiency of cutting process in which a large number of elementary abrasive grits passes across workpiece to remove the material in form of tinier chips, resulting in lower force and longer tool life. However, in view of the material formation, the thinner chips are not superior aspect of high speed grinding. To eliminate the influence of the chip size effect, and to make the research on the speed effect of material removal mechanism significant, a study to understand high speed grinding process and provide information for grinding optimization is necessary.	0
In fact, the “speed effect” on the grinding process was first proposed by Bowe . He proposed that, if all the speeds (the grinding speed vs, workpiece speed vw and feed speed vf ) are increased in a fixed proportion, the temperature will be reduced, that any change in the specific energy will be due to the speed effect since the size and shape of the cut taken by each tooth remained unchanged. It was found that the grinding force and specific grinding energy were reduced with increasing grinding speed. Similar results were obtained by Yoshio  in high speed grinding of bearing steel, which showed that the grinding energy at a grinding speed higher than 200m/s was reduced by 20–30% compared with that at the conventional grinding speed of 60m/s, and that the reduction of surface roughness was mainly due to the reduction of the side swelling formed along both sides of the groove with increasing grinding speed. Feng and Jin  found that compared to conventional speed grinding, higher speed grinding parameters caused corresponding changes in strain, strain rate and heat transfer conditions of the grinding zone, thus changing the material removal mechanism under the high speeds. In a subsequent study, Zhao  conducted ultra-high speed single-grit tests using rifle as the accelerator and charger to study the high speed effect on the material removal mechanism. His research indicated that the material became a mobile phase and the flowing material formed the chips due to the high temperature produced by friction from ultra-high speed.	0
However, there is still lack of evidence to confirm the speed effect on the material removal mechanism, especially the material removal process. The material removal process which is separated into three phases: rubbing, ploughing and cutting. In rubbing, material removal is negligible including only elastic deformation although friction is apparent. Rubbing is typical of a polishing operation, and the force on each grain is too small to cause large penetration into the workpiece. When the penetration of the grain is increased, ploughing occurs where the material is removed in both elastic and plastic, In the ploughing stage, scratch marks become evident and ridges are formed at the sides of the scratches. As the penetration of the grain is further increased, material removal increases rapidly and chip formation takes place. The grinding force and specific energy are changed based on the three components involved in the material removal. It is concluded that the visible morphology of material removal process are important features of metal machining and yield useful information on grinding mechanisms. In fact, it is difficult to apply the classical single-grit grinding experimental method  to study the morphology which is useful in understanding the speed effect.	0
In this study, in order to observe the material removal process in single grit grinding, a new method of testing of high speed grinding with single-grit was conducted to obtain the wedge-shape chips at microscale similar to those given in actual grinding process. Further the critical thickness of the chip formation grinding and force of single grit grinding were analyzed to make this research study useful in understanding speed effect on the material removal mechanism.	0
The high speed grinding machine, BLOHM PROFIMAT MT-408 with water base grinding fluid was employed. The maximum rotational speed and output power were 8000rpm and 45kW respectively.  shows the schematic of the single-grit grinding experimental set-up. The grit holder and the balancing weight were symmetrically located in the V-shaped slot in order improve the resistance to centrifugal force and obtain high location accuracy.	1
A regular diamond shaped 30/40 mesh size single grit was chosen as tool and brazed on a grit holder. As shown in , the single diamond is an octahedron which consists of eight hexagon planes and six rectangular planes. The brazed single grains are optimized to make sure that the cutting edge of abrasive is oriented towards the material flow direction.	1
The difficult to cut material super-alloy GH4169 was selected as the specimen workpiece. Its hardness was 289.2HV. The chemical composition of the workpiece is presented in . The workpiece dimensions were 50mm long×20mm wide×50mm high. The workpiece surface was ground and polished prior to the scratching tests. The polished surface roughness (Ra) was around 0.04μm. In the experiments, the single grit was precisely preset by using an acoustic emission instrument (DITTEL AE6000) as shown in . The single grit grinding forces were measured by a four component piezoelectric dynamometer (KISTLER9272) linked to the scratched surface.	1
As mentioned above, in order to observe the traces of material removal process, a new method for single-grit grinding was adopted.  shows that the single-grit grinding process is divided into two steps, firstly, the grit moves in a spiral course generated by the workpiece feed speed vf and grinding speed vs, the direction of vf of first scratching step is at an angle of θ to the x-axis and then the grinding wheel moves back to the starting point O to prepare for the second scratching. In the second scratching step, the workpiece feed speed vf and grinding speed vs remain unchanged, but unlike the first scratching step, the direction of vf is along the x-axis direction. Thus, there is an angle θ between these two steps of scratching. As seen in , due to the existence of angle of misalignment, θ (θ>0), the maximum distance of misalignment between the first scratching and second scratching is denoted as λ, which commendably stimulates the successive cutting edge distance of abrasives distributed on grinding wheel surface. Therefore, the wedge-shaped chips similar to actual grinding could be obtained with this new method. As  shows, the cross section profiles of the wedge-shaped chips are similar to the geometry of chips generated by grinding with a grinding wheel.	0
In second grinding step, the grit moves on a spiral path produced by the workpiece feed speed vf and grinding speed vs. The helical pitch P, of the spiral path for a single grit grinding wheel diameter, d can be shown as	0
If P is greater than the width of a single grit, the whole material removal process which is generated by the single grit scratching would be displayed on the surface of workpiece. The cross sections of four chips aligned along the y-axis are shown in . Evidently the thickness of the chips decreases in the y-axis positive direction, that is d4>d3>d2>d1.	1
In order to grasp the speed effect on the material removal mechanism under a constant condition of the maximum chip thickness agmax=8μm, the grinding speed vs was increased in proportion to the increase in feed speed of workpiece, vf which was in the range of 20–165m/s. The angle θ was kept at 4° during the single-grit grinding tests. In addition to the force measurement, the topography of chips and material removal process were measured to obtain additional information on the process, the presentation of which follows.	1
 shows the theoretical geometrical model of single-grinding test. In the preceding section, due to the existence of the angle θ, the second scratching area ABCD is distinguished from the first scratching area AB′C′D′, the intersection line of two step scratching process is BC on which the undeformed chip thickness is zero. In area ABCD, the points which have the equivalent chip thickness are connected with a line. In this paper, this line is called equivalent chip thickness line. According to the definition, the intersection line BC is equivalent chip thickness line which is also called zero chip thickness line.	0
Another important equivalent chip thickness line is the critical thickness of chip formation line which is shown in . According to the principle of grinding , with increasing penetration of grit into the workpiece, the chip thickness increases. When the chip thickness increases to a critical value, the material is removed in the form of chip. This critical value is called critical thickness of chip formation.	0
For instance, the micrographs of scratch trace generated in single-grit test using the new method at the grinding speed of 20m/s is shown in , according to which, with the change of chip thickness, the material removal process is separated into three phases namely, rubbing, ploughing and cutting. Similarly, it is also seen from , that the grinding area ABCD is divided into three parts by the three equivalent chip thickness lines. The top line represents the critical thickness of chip formation line which is the boundary line between cutting and ploughing areas. The middle line which is the boundary line between rubbing and ploughing areas is defined as critical thickness of plastic deformation line in this paper. The bottom line B′C is the zero chip thickness line. Due to the plastic deformation recovery, the line, B′C does not coincide with the theoretical zero chip thickness line BC mentioned earlier.	0
, is a photograph of surface morphology and shows that the material removal process is separated into three areas in vertical orientation. The detailed views of these three areas (rubbing area, ploughing area and cutting area) are identified in (I–IV). As evident in (I), in the rubbing area, several vertical scratches are uniformly distributed along the horizontal direction. It is due to the reason that the single grit initially slides on the material surface and the workpiece material is subjected to elastic deformation. The ploughing region which is characterized by multiple of pile-ups is shown in (II), with increasing penetration of grit into the workpiece, the single grit exceeds the critical thickness of plastic deformation, while the material is pushed and piled up ahead of the grit under plastic deformation. When the chip thickness increases to the critical thickness of chip formation, the changes in morphology on both sides of critical thickness of chip formation line indicates that the mechanism of material removal is transformed from ploughing to cutting, as shown in (III). This transformation is due to the inability of the material to withstand the increasing shearing stress. The super-alloy GH4169 is removed in form of a chip, differing from that of ploughing area. The grooves with higher pile-up are left on the workpiece grinding surface in the cutting area as illustrated in (IV). In brief, at the grinding speed of 20m/s, due to the different mechanisms of material removal, three phases of morphology are identified, that means the rubbing, ploughing and cutting areas respectively correspond to the scratches, pile-up, and grooves with pile-up.	0
 shows the photograph of surface generated at the grinding speed of 100m/s. Compared to that observed with the grinding speed of 20m/s, the critical thickness of chip formation line shifts to the bottom. The detailed views of rubbing area are shown in (I), in which the scratches are subtler than those obtained with grinding speed of 20m/s. With increasing the grinding speed to 100m/s, the materials are removed rapidly due to increasing strain which in turn reduces the material plasticity, and cause lower pile-up of ploughing area as shown in (II). There is an obvious critical thickness of chip formation line in the white belt area the detail of which is shown in  and (II). As shown in (III) and (IV), due to decrease in plasticity, the material easily forms chips with increasing grinding speeds in range of 20–100m/s, thus the height of pile-up along the sides of grooves is reduced making the surface smooth and flat.	0
When the grinding speed is increased to 165m/s, the distinct three areas separated by the two lines are shown in . The critical thickness of chip formation line shifted more upwards at higher grinding speed of 165m/s compared to that at 100m/s. The global morphology of the three phases is the similar to that at 20m/s, but the differences when observed in detail are that the scratches ((I)) are more visible, the pile-up of ploughing area ((II)) is higher and more broad, and the grooves have become deeper ((III)) in the cutting area. These results are contributed by the improved plasticity resulting from the rising temperature caused by the increasing grinding speeds of 100–165m/s.	0
In summary, the changes in morphologies of the three phases when increasing the grinding speed indicate that the speed obviously influences the material deformation and chip formation.	0
In the preceding section, it was mentioned that due to the speed effect, the location of critical thickness of chip formation line shifted with increase in the single grit grinding speed. In order to quantitatively evaluate the relationship between critical thickness of chip formation and grinding speed, the cross section of the single-grit grinding chip was selected for the analyses.  shows the geometrical model of the chip. This model assumed that the distance between the critical thickness of chip formation line and point D is llin. Based on the kinematics of this model, shown in , the angle α can be expressed aswhere, ap is the single-grit grinding depth of cut which is a constant of value, 0.03mm and the r is the radius of the grinding wheel.	0
This model assumed that the O′B is x, in triangle of OO′ B, according the law of cosines, the relationship among the parameters of λ, x, α and r is given by,Substituting Eq.  in Eq. , r is obtained. Thus the critical thickness of chip formation works out to,	0
 shows the relationship between the critical thickness of chip formation and the grinding speed. The curve has higher values at the both its ends and a lower value at its middle. The turnaround speed is 100m/s. The result shows that the removal mechanism of the super-alloy GH4169 changes at 100m/s. That is, when the grinding speed is below 100m/s, with increasing speed, the strain rate increases more rapidly than the temperature so that the material plasticity is reduced and the chip formation becomes easier, on the other hand, when the grinding speed increases from 100m/s to 165m/s the thermal softening assumes the key role in chip formation.	0
The chips from single grit grinding tests were recovered by the chip collection apparatus, Then they were degreased by acetone. After drying, the micrographs of the chips were scanned by the scanning electron microscope (SEM). As seen in the micrographs in , the chip has two sides. One side with the smooth side is the grit–chip interface, while the other side is the rough side, which is characterized by cracks and segment feature like the cutting segmented chips. it is believed that the high strain rate and low thermal conductivity of GH4169 cause adiabatic shear resulting in segment chip deformation. In order to further analyze quantitatively the characteristics of chips deformation, the cross-section of a typical segmented chip was obtained as shown in , by using the three dimensional laser morphology analyzer (VK-X100).	0
As shown in , the angle (α) is the angle between the shear band and the tangent to the grit–chip surface of the single-grit grinding chip. Lx denotes the tangent distance of the chip segmentations. According to the principles of cutting , the shear frequency of the chip can be expressed as,Lc is the length of the cyclic chip segmentations.	0
The effect of grinding speed on the shear frequency of single grit grinding chip is illustrated in . When the maximum chip thickness is maintained at 8μm, the shear frequency almost increases linearly with increasing grinding speed up to 165m/s. This trend in variation is attributed to the increasing strain rate from the speed effect. Thus the adiabatic shear occurs more easily in chip formation process and the area of chip segmentations becomes smaller.	0
The pile-up ratio which is defined as the ratio of total pile up area to total groove section area is a sound method to quantify and demonstrate the material removal mechanism . As shown in , the pile-up area is B1 and B2, and groove section area is characterized by A. Thus the pile up ratio Rs is expressed as follows:	0
On the basis of Eq. , the pile up ratios at various increasing grinding speeds were calculated. As shown in , when the maximum chip thickness is constant, the pile up ratio decreased rapidly with increasing grinding speed up to a speed of 60m/s, which is due to the effects from strain hardening. Later on the pile-up ratio increased slowly with increasing grinding speed up to a speed of 165m/s, and this trend in results is attributed to the thermal softening caused by the increased single-grit grinding temperature.	0
In order to further explore the speed effects on mechanism of high speed grinding, the single grit grinding forces were measured at a constant maximum chip thickness over a grinding speed ranging from 20m/s to 165m/s.	0
(I) shows the effect of grinding speed on the single grit grinding force Fg for wet grinding. The single grit grinding force initially increases rapidly and then decreases with increasing grinding speed. The increasing and decreasing trends in the grinding force were respectively due to strain hardening and thermal softening effects resulting from the speed increase. As can be seen in (I), the turnaround speed is at the grinding speed of 100m/s. This result is similar to the relationship observed earlier between the critical thickness of chip formation and grinding speed. The change is mainly due to the speed effect influencing the predominance between strain hardening effect and the thermal softening effect, in this process, the turnaround point would shift depending on the intensity of thermal softening effect. In comparison to dry grinding, in wet grinding, the grinding force decreases with increasing grinding speed. This point is illustrated in (II). The reason for this trend is attributed to the thermal softening effect from grinding speed increasing from 20 to 100m/min. Thus it is believed that the turnaround point shifts (in the direction) from 100m/s to 20m/s as the cooling conditions change from wet to dry.	0
The variations observed in critical thickness of chip formation, grinding force, and the pile up ratio with increasing grinding speed indicates that the transformations of material removal mechanisms, which are mainly attributed to the speed effect significantly impacting the material removal process. A common characteristic is that all the graphs showing relationships between the parameters have a turnaround point which is about 100m/s. Similarly, the same characteristic which is shown in  reveals the relationship between metallic material plasticity and deformation velocity.	0
In fact, the turnaround point c could be regarded as the watershed point which is the grinding speed of 100m/s. Therefore, the grinding speed range of 20–100m/s is called phase I in this paper. The phase II is in range of 100–165m/s. In phase I, when the material deformation velocity increases with increasing grinding speed, the material plasticity declines which results in the decreasing of the pile-up ratio, easy formation of chip and reduced critical thickness of chip formation. Contrary to expectation of speed effect in phase I, the material plasticity improves with increasing grinding speed, which causes the decreasing of the pile-up ratio and decline in critical thickness of the chip formation.	0
(I), showing initial increasing and later decreasing trends in the grinding force can also be divided into two phases. Generally, the deformation of metals is governed by the Johnson–Cook law . The flow strength is a function of strain (ε), strain rate (ε̇), and temperature (T) as shown in the following relationship:	0
In phase I, the strain hardening factor ([1+gln(ε./ε.0)]) dominates the flow stress with the increasing grinding speed while the temperature is not high enough. But when the grinding speed increases further into phase II, the single grit grinding temperature increases rapidly and the grinding force decreases due to the predominance of the thermal softening factor ([1−a(T/T0)]) over strain hardening. Therefore the speed effects the predominance between strain hardening and thermal softening, which results in the change in material removal mechanism in high speed grinding.	0
The grinding speed prominently affects the various phases of material removal process, the morphologies of which were obtained in single-grit grinding by using a new method. The material removal process could be separated into rubbing, ploughing and cutting phases by two lines namely, critical thickness of chip formation line and critical thickness of plastic deformation line. With increasing grinding speed, these two lines initially shift upwards and then downwards.	0
The speed effects on the changes in material deformation and chip formation is demonstrated. A common turnaround point of 100m/s is established in the graphical relationships between the critical thickness of chip formation and pile-up ratio with the grinding speed, which indicated that the material plasticity decreased with increasing grinding speed in the range of 20–100m/s, and improved in speed range of 100–165m/s. The chips of difficult to machine material GH4169 is characterized by cracks and segmented features due to the adiabatic shear during high speed single-grit grinding. The shear frequency of segmented chips increases almost linearly with grinding speed up to 165m/s. This trend in results is attributed to increasing strain rate from the speed effect.	0
The single grit grinding force associated with material removal mechanism initially increases with increasing grinding speed due to the strain hardening, and then decreases as the grinding speed increases from 100m/min to 165m/s due to the predominance of thermal softening over strain hardening. The speed effect causes the predominance between strain hardening and thermal softening to alternate, which changes the material removal mechanism in high speed grinding. These findings of this study should help in explaining the essential differences between conventional speed grinding and high speed grinding.	0
Based on this work, in order to thorough understanding of high speed grinding difficult to machine material, a further study on speed effect requires extend to real field of high speed grinding with multiple abrasives wheel.	0
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the  (No. 51235004).	0
Residual stresses have a great influence on the fatigue performance of metallic materials. A compressive residual stress field can be beneficial for the fatigue life and delay crack initiation and crack growth. On the contrary, tensile residual stresses should be avoided because they favour the crack initiation and increase the crack growth rate.	0
Residual stresses can differ by their nature and their origins . In some cases, their introduction result from processing and/or machining operation as recently discussed and analysed by Bhowal et al. for Direct Aged (DA) 718 alloy . Many studies  were undertaken to determine the effect of machining parameters on the surface integrity and the creation of residual stresses on nickel-based superalloy. Authors indicate that the use of a worn tool or abusive machining conditions results in poor surface integrity and contributes to create harmful residual stresses. As an example, for the specific case of DA 718 alloy, Bhowal et al. showed that the machining process may lead to a decrease of the LCF life by a factor of 3–15 due to the fracture of surface non-metallic inclusions. In other cases, engineers want to introduce compressive residual stresses at the surface and thus enhance the fatigue performance of a material. In the last decades, many techniques have been developed to reach this objective. However, compressive residual stresses generated by a subsequent shot peening are effective in protecting the alloy from a LCF life debit due to the machining process. The main issue is then to control the amplitude and the gradient of the generated compressive residual stresses and to evaluate their relaxation induced by pure thermal exposure  or by mechanical loading . The cold working produced  and the microstructural characteristics  can also modify the material behaviour for the stress relaxation. Indeed, minimizing the cold work produced during the surface treatment seems to reduce the amplitude of the stress relaxation. Finally, the control of the introduction of residual stresses in critical components and the ability to predict their effect on fatigue life appear as key issues in the work of a design engineer.	0
This study focuses on the influence of the residual stresses generated during the introduction of small surface anomalies in the Ni-based DA Inconel 718 alloy that can be created during maintenance operations of a structural component. Indeed, aircraft engine manufacturers have to demonstrate that the presence of such small surface anomalies in critical areas does not lead to structural failure. The anomalies studied are scratches (V-type anomaly) and dents (U-type anomaly). The studies dedicated to the behaviour of this type of surface anomaly in low cycle fatigue are scarce in literature. Some studies  evaluate the presence of hardening and residual stresses around scratches, but little is known concerning their influence on fatigue life . Other authors have investigated the harmfulness of foreign object impact damage , which can be assimilated to a high impact energy dent. As a consequence the results cannot be directly applied to this work because the dents studied here have lower impact energy, so that the associated work hardening and the subsequent residual stresses might be different. Finally the most similar surface anomalies investigated in literature are Vickers indentations .	0
In this context, the objective of the present work is to characterize the crack initiation and crack propagation stages in DA Inconel 718 alloy in the presence of scratches and dents. In particular, the shape of a crack starting from a given initial surface anomaly is studied. The use of heat tints allows the observation of the evolution of crack front shapes. A heat treatment is used to reduce the intensity of residual stresses generated during the introduction of the surface anomalies and by this mean, to evaluate their impact on the different stages of fatigue life. A Direct Current Potential Drop (DCPD) method is employed to detect the crack initiation and determine the crack growth rate during the propagation stage .	0
The present study is performed on DA 718 alloy, which is a precipitation hardened nickel-based alloy that is extensively used for aerospace applications for components in gas turbine engines. The nominal composition of Inconel 718 alloy is given in . The austenitic FCC γ matrix of this superalloy is strengthened by the precipitation of γ′ (Ll2 structure, Ni3(Ti–Al)) and γ″ (DO22 structure, Ni3(Nb–Ti)) particles. Ni3Nb δ phase is another type of precipitate which is preferentially located along grain boundaries after standard processing operation. Direct age treatment is a processing route which contributes to enhance the cyclic fatigue behaviour and improve the tensile strength. In this treatment, the material is directly quenched after the forging steps and then aged by the conventional ageing treatment: 8h at 720°C, furnace cooling down to 620°C at a rate of 50°Ch−1, 8h at 620°C and finally air cooling. The resulting grain size is very small (5–10µm).	1
One way to highlight the effect of residual stresses consists in reducing or removing them. Several techniques exist to relax the residual stresses. Some studies evaluate the stress relaxation in nickel-based superalloy by thermal exposure after shot peening . It is shown that the use of a heat treatment results in a reduction of the residual stress magnitude. However the depth of residual stresses is not affected. It can be explained by the fact that the thermal relaxation mechanisms are short-range recovery processes  which reduce the overall stored energy. The extent of stress relaxation is then higher when the level of stored energy is important. The stress relaxation induced by thermal exposure also appears to be time and temperature dependent. Indeed, the magnitude of stress relaxation increases with the temperature of the heat treatment . Furthermore, some authors  describe the thermal stress relaxation on two timescales. Thus, it seems that the maximum of relaxation occurs during the first stage of thermal exposure even at low temperature. Then, a longer timescale mechanism occurs and causes a weak magnitude of relaxation.	0
Another technique commonly used to relax the residual stresses consists in mechanical relaxation methods . Indeed, a mechanical loading below the yield stress can efficiently reduce the residual stresses . In the case of fatigue loading, the relaxation mainly occurs during the first cycles and depends on several factors such as the initial surface state, the mechanical behaviour of the material, the nature of the mechanical loading  and the magnitude of the applied stress . These studies describe the mechanical stress relaxation mechanisms and explain that it occurs when the misfits between the bulk material and the affected zone are reduced during the loading.	0
In the present study, a heat treatment technique was selected to relax the residual stresses generated during the introduction process of surface anomalies. Although this method is quite easy to apply, the main constraint is to ensure an effective residual stress relaxation without deeply altering the microstructural parameters such as grain size, precipitation volume fraction, size, distribution etc. The time–temperature-transformation diagram of alloy 718 established by Sims  was used to define the appropriate heat treatment. Indeed, in order to retain the original grain size, the temperature has to remain below the solvus of the δ phase which is ~1020°C . In addition, the mechanical properties of the material must not be affected. A modification of the γ″ phase has hence to be avoided. Consequently, the temperature has to be, at least, below 920°C, which corresponds to the solvus of this phase . However, since this γ″ phase is metastable above ~650°C, this implies to define a temperature below 650°C to prevent any transformation of the γ″ phase. However, preliminary attempts indicated that a thermal annealing of 100h at 600°C under vacuum does not produce any stress relaxation near and below the surface anomalies according to microindentation measurements. A similar result was found by Khadraoui et al. . The solution to relax the residual stresses using a heat treatment was then to increase the temperature, although it will certainly modify the microstructure. The heat treatment was therefore designed in order to relax the residual stresses while minimizing the microstructural transformations, and limiting as much as possible grain coarsening. Indeed, one of the most influent parameter controlling the fatigue behaviour of Inconel 718 alloy is the grain size. A temperature of 980°C with a 4h holding time in vacuum followed by a water quench was then defined. This temperature is below the solvus of the δ phase which limits the grain coarsening. However, considering that this temperature is above the γ″ solvus, the conventional aeronautical aging heat treatment of Alloy 718 (i.e. 8h at 720°C, furnace cooling till to 620°C at a rate of 50°Ch−1, 8h at 620°C and air cooling) has then been applied. Finally, the different steps of the heat treatment designed to relax the residual stresses and limit the microstructural modification are summarized in .	1
During the first step of the heat treatment which can be considered as a sub-δ-solvus solution treatment, the original microstructure of DA Inconel 718 alloy suffers some transformations. It is then necessary to evaluate the evolution of the material after the heat treatment. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Electron BackScatter Diffraction (EBSD) techniques have been used to characterize the microstructural evolutions. A JEOL 6100 SEM and EBSD data have been analysed using an OIM software. The grain size is determined from the orientation maps presented in  performed using the bulk material before (i.e. the as-received direct aged state) and after the heat treatment presented in . The Gaussian average of grain size is 5.6µm for DA Inconel 718 alloy before the heat treatment and it increases to 10.4µm after the heat treatment. These average values take into account the presence of twin boundaries. The grain size is defined as the equivalent diameter of same area. Additionnal SEM observations to characterize the evolution of the δ phase during this heat-treatment have been performed using a JEOL JSM 7000F field emission gun SEM and a backscattered electron imaging mode.  presents the effect of the heat treatment on the δ phase. Image processing techniques developed in the laboratory using the Visilog software  permit to perform a stereological analysis of the δ phase. The Gaussian averages of the length, width and equivalent diameters of the δ particles before and after the heat treatment are summarized in . Overall, six zones, each covering a 90×120µm2 surface have been analysed after the heat treatment and three zones of the same size for the material before the heat treatment. It corresponds with the 3882 particles and 1121 particles measured after and before the heat treatment, respectively. The morphology of the δ phase appears to be slightly modified. Indeed, the particles of this phase are thinner and shorter after the heat treatment but their density increases from 75%. The percentage of the δ area fraction is also observed to slightly decrease: it is equal to 4.4% before the heat treatment and to 3.6% after. Finally, the microstructural analyses reveal that the grain size is doubled and the particle morphology of the δ phase is slightly modified. The effect of these microstructural evolutions on the referenced fatigue behaviour of DA Inconel 718 alloy has then to be evaluated.	1
At a macroscopic scale, a compares the crack growth rates obtained for a crack starting from a semi-elliptical anomaly (depth=100µm, surface length=2.4mm – b) introduced before and after the heat treatment. Crack growth rates are obtained from potential drop measurements detailed hereafter. The stress intensity factor is calculated at point A (visible in c) corresponding to the point of the crack front perpendicular to the middle of the anomaly. c presents experimental heat tints which ensure a semi-elliptical crack front shape moving from a ratio c/a (length/depth) of 2.2 at the start to almost 1 at the end of the propagation. A specific device developed in the laboratory is used to introduce these semi-elliptical anomalies. It involves a zircon disc rotating at low speed (about 200rpm) and polishing the material surface using a 6µm diamond paste by steps of 10µm deep. This fabrication process seems mildly traumatic for the material and should ensure that no (or a very low amount of) residual stresses are generated near the anomaly. Experimental measurements of a are furthermore compared with the reference crack growth rate  modelled using a Paris law and determined for the propagation of a long crack in this alloy. It can be seen that the heat treatment has a minor influence on the crack growth rates since the two curves in a are almost identical and close to the reference crack growth rate, especially at low ΔK values.	0
While the microstructural modifications induced by the heat treatment have a very limited impact on the crack growth rate of DA Inconel 718 alloy, it has been decided to investigate the effect of residual stresses generated during the introduction process of surface anomalies only on the “new” material after the heat treatment. However, regarding the previous results, the conclusions that will be established in this study should also be relevant to DA Inconel 718 alloy.	1
Before the experimental tests to evaluate the influence of residual stresses created during the fabrication of surface anomalies on the crack propagation rates and fatigue lives from these defects, residual stress relaxation has to be investigated. For this, micro-hardness characterizations have been performed since this kind of characterization is sensitive to the presence of hardening and residual stresses under the surface anomalies . Samples with scratches and dents introduced in the material before and after the heat treatment are cut in the middle of their length in order to obtain the profile of the anomaly. Then, a grid of Vickers indentations is realized below the anomaly. A force of 5N is used and contributes to create indentations with a diagonal of about 45µm. This value ensures that, in average, 4–8 grains over the surface are included below the indentation. Thereby, it can be assumed that the resulting micro-hardness is hardly influenced by any local heterogeneity of the material. However the main drawback of this technique resides in the low accuracy in the characterization of the affected zone. Indeed, the distance between two indentations has to be above four times the diagonal of the indentations to avoid any interaction between them. A minimum distance of 180µm is then used between the indentations. This leads to a coarse discretization in depth under the anomalies.  presents the results of micro-hardness tests under scratches and dents machined before and after the heat treatment.	1
The micro-hardness below surface anomalies introduced after the heat treatment is higher than the reference when measured close to the free edge of the anomaly except for the closest indentation at the centre line below the dent. The reference corresponds to the micro-hardness measurements in the bulk material away from the anomalies. Thus, it seems that residual stresses generated during the introduction of surface anomalies have an influence on micro-hardness measurements. However, this effect does not exist anymore for scratches and dents introduced before the heat treatment. Indeed, in this case, the micro-hardness measurements are close to the reference value in bulk material all around the surface anomalies. Therefore, it can be assumed that the sub-solvus heat treatment at 980°C (see ) is efficient in relaxing the residual stresses. It should also be noted that it cannot be concluded that residual stresses are entirely removed. These results rather indicate that the relaxation is high enough to annihilate their influence on micro-hardness measurements, but they might still affect the fatigue crack propagation from these anomalies. However, for the sake of clarity, a surface anomaly introduced after the heat treatment will be called “a surface anomaly with residual stresses” and a surface anomaly introduced before the heat treatment “a surface anomaly without residual stresses” in the following of this paper.	0
The aim of the experimental fatigue tests is to characterize the influence of residual stresses on the fatigue life of the heat treated DA Inconel 718 alloy containing surface anomalies. As already mentioned earlier, the heat treatment used to relax the residual stresses affects the microstructure of DA Inconel 718 alloy. Therefore, fatigue results of specimens containing scratches and dents introduced either before or after the heat treatment will be compared, but for the same microstructure. The residual stresses generated during the fabrication should be relaxed for anomalies introduced before the heat treatment while they should influence the fatigue life when the fabrication takes place after the heat treatment.	0
Fatigue tests are performed under load control on a MTS hydraulic machine using a sinusoidal waveform signal, a stress ratio R=0.05, a frequency of 2Hz and at a temperature of 550°C. These loading conditions were selected in order to cover the stress field encountered during in-service operation of high pressure turbine discs. Fatigue specimens containing two surface anomalies are used for the experiments. Details of the specimen geometrical configuration are indicated in . The gage area presents a rectangular section and a 22mm length. The heads of the specimen are cylindrical. It is noteworthy that finite element simulations proved that a distance of 6mm between the surface anomalies is sufficient to avoid interactions between cracks starting from anomalies .	1
Two types of surface anomalies are studied. Scratches are V-type anomalies. Their length is 1mm and they present a V-profile with a notch radius of 30µm and an angle of 90°. They are introduced by a carbide tool with a controlled geometry which indents the specimen surface until a calibrated depth and then scratches out the surface. Dents are U-type anomalies of 2mm long. Their machining process simulates the fall of a tool such as a screwdriver on the specimen surface. On a specific device, a mass falls from a calibrated height on a carbide tool which penetrates the specimen surface and creates the dent. The depth of these surface anomalies is 150µm for scratches and 200µm for dents.	0
The specimens are equipped with a Direct Current Potential Drop (DCPD) method to perform crack growth measurements. The principle of the DCPD method is based on a constant electrical current passing through the specimen and the measurement of the potential difference across the crack. As the crack extends, the electrical resistance of the uncracked cross sectional area rises and thus the measured potential drop increases. Calibration curves are then used to relate the potential drop to the crack length. The accuracy of these calibration curves is essential to analyse the experimental data. It has been the subject of a previous in depth study  in parallel of these tests and this technique is now fully controlled and workable. The precision obtained is inferior to 100µm for the detection of crack initiation and for the evaluation of crack depth.  exposes a schematic illustration of the potential probes position on the fatigue sample. These probes are platinum wires of 0.1mm diameter. They are spot welded on both sides of each anomaly on positions previously identified by small Vickers indents. As the anomaly width on the surface depends on the anomaly geometry, two different positions are used. Potential probes are respectively positioned at 800µm and 1050µm away from the scratch and dent crack planes.	1
Crack front markings are also performed by means of heat tints. This technique consists in interrupting the fatigue test at different predefined stages of the propagation life and maintaining the specimen at zero force while keeping temperature for a given time to form an oxide layer which colours the fracture surface.  illustrates this procedure of heat tinting (a) and shows an example of fracture surface after a heat tint for a scratch (b). The shape and the position of the crack corresponding with this marking are then optically measured to determine the evolution of the crack during the fatigue life of the specimen. In the case of DA Inconel 718 alloy and for the load conditions of the present study, it was verified that the crack growth rate is not influenced by the heat tint procedure. Indeed, for a given load configuration, the same fatigue life is obtained from specimens tested with and without heat tints. Furthermore, the analysis of the crack growth rate data confirms that no delay or acceleration of the crack growth rate takes place after heat tints. Thus the data obtained from both heat tinted and un-marked specimens can be used to characterize the harmfulness of surface anomalies. This technique is very simple, low time consuming (two hours were sufficient to realize a heat tint in the present case), easy to implement and further allows to determine the crack front shape after the test completion.	0
Fatigue test results reveal that the total fatigue life is strongly dependent on residual stresses. Indeed, when stress relaxation occurs by means of the heat treatment, the fatigue life decreases by a factor 2 for specimens containing scratches and by a factor 2.4 for dents in comparison with specimens where scratches or dents are introduced after the heat treatment.  summarizes the total fatigue life for each specimen and the average value obtained for surface anomalies with and without residual stresses.	0
These results are consistent with the effect of compressive residual stresses introduced by surface treatment like shot peening and characterized in the literature . The presence of compressive residual stresses under the anomalies generates a beneficial effect on the fatigue performance of the material. This beneficial effect is analysed in the next sections.	0
Residual stresses can influence different stages of the fatigue life and in particular, the crack initiation. First, different crack initiation site locations are observed for scratches depending on the moment of their introduction in the specimen relatively to the heat treatment. In the presence of compressive residual stresses below scratches, the initiation occurs at the bottom of the anomaly but also at the corner. In particular, a geometrical defect created in a corner during the introduction process is a preferred initiation site. In the case of relaxed residual stresses, the initiation is always located at the bottom of the anomaly. For dents, cracks initiate always at the bottom of the anomaly regardless of the presence of compressive residual stresses. These behaviours are illustrated in .	0
Experimental results () also reveal an important influence of residual stresses on the initiation fatigue life from scratches and dents. An accurate method to detect crack initiation was developed in the study concerning the DCPD technique . In the configuration under study, an increase of 0.5% of the potential drop corresponds to a 100µm deep crack from the bottom of an anomaly. The initiation fatigue life is then defined as the number of cycle to generate a 100µm deep crack from the bottom of a scratch or a dent.	0
Initiation fatigue life of scratches without residual stresses is inferior by a factor 3.8 to the ones with residual stresses. The opposite effect is observed for dent type surface anomalies. Indeed, with relaxed residual stresses the average initiation life is 1.6 times higher than in presence of residual stresses. Nevertheless, it is important to note that, in each case, the initiation fatigue life is very short in comparison with the total fatigue life. Indeed, the initiation stage corresponds in average to a maximum of 12% of the total fatigue life.	0
The results presented so far have shown that the total fatigue life (initiation+propagation) of specimens containing surface anomalies is higher in presence of compressive residual stresses while the initiation stage is very short in all cases. Therefore at least a transient decrease in crack growth rates is expected to account for the difference between the fatigue life obtained for surface anomalies introduced before and after the heat treatment. The analysis of the potential drop measurements confirms this effect on crack growth rates. Indeed,  compares the experimental crack growth rates of cracks starting from scratches and dents introduced before and after the heat treatment. It is important to note that these crack growth rate results are highly dependent on the crack front shape evolution. As it can be seen in , the crack front may not be semi-elliptical in presence of residual stresses. In this case, the stress intensity factor is determined by assuming a crack of same surface length c and depth a. The depth is measured at point A corresponding to the point of the crack front perpendicular to the middle of the anomaly. Despite this approximation, results can be trusted: in the same experimental conditions, crack growth rates obtained for a semi-elliptical evolution of the crack front are very similar to the ones determined in the case where the evolution of the crack front is not semi-elliptical.	0
The slower crack growth rate in the presence of residual stresses concerns the first stages of crack propagation for scratches. For this type of anomaly, in the presence of compressive residual stresses below the anomaly, the crack growth is delayed over a depth of 1mm when compared to the crack growth rate obtained for a scratch with relaxed residual stresses (see a). After 1mm of propagation, the crack growth rate is observed to be hardly affected by the presence of residual stresses. For dent type anomaly, the effect of compressive residual stresses is visible on the crack growth rate until fracture of the specimen. When residual stresses are relaxed by heat treatment, the crack growth rate is always higher than for dents with compressive residual stresses under the anomaly.	0
Residual stresses are also responsible for another effect on the propagation stage of a crack starting from a scratch or a dent. Indeed, the evolution of the crack front shape is disturbed by the presence of compressive residual stresses below the anomalies. A scratch introduced after the heat treatment may present two initiation sites located at the bottom and in the corner of the anomaly containing a geometrical defect. These two initiation sites lead to the development of two independent cracks until they merge to form a unique crack front of semi-elliptical shape (a and b). This scenario differs when the compressive residual stresses are relaxed. In this case, only one crack initiates from the bottom of the anomaly and propagates with a regular semi-elliptical crack front shape (c and d).	0
For dent type anomalies, the compressive residual stresses induce an ear-shaped crack front. Indeed, after the initiation at the bottom of the dent, the propagation occurs along the dent until a corner is reached. Then the crack growth appears faster in the direction of the corner than in the axis under the anomaly (a and b). This effect leads to an “ear like” crack front shape. On the other hand, after the relaxation of the residual stresses, the evolution of the crack front shape for dents is quite similar as scratches (c and d). In this case, the crack starts at the bottom of the anomaly and its propagation happens according to a regular semi-elliptical crack front shape.	0
The differences between the crack initiation fatigue life of scratches with and without the presence of residual stresses seem consistent with the results reported in literature. Indeed, some authors showed that the initiation under foreign object damage  or a Vickers indentation  is highly dependent on the residual stresses under the anomaly. In this study, relaxation of residual stresses favoured the crack initiation from scratches. Compressive residual stresses under the anomaly therefore postpone crack initiation. On the other hand, opposite results are obtained for the initiation of a crack from dent type anomalies. After the relaxation of residual stresses, the initiation is longer than in presence of compressive residual stresses. In order to understand this result, the influence of the heat treatment on the initial microstructural state under dents was analysed. Indeed, the damage created in the microstructure during the introduction of surface anomalies is known to favour crack initiation . SEM observations were performed below dents machined before and after the heat treatment.  compares the microstructural state obtained below dents depending on the time of introduction relative to the heat treatment. A 10–15µm thick White Etching Layer (WEL) is observed around a dent introduced after the heat treatment (a) while the microstructure appears almost unaffected in the other case (b). Moreover, important signs of plastic deformation are visible up to 100µm from the edge of the dent machined after the heat treatment. Grains are highly distorted in the dent orientation, shear bands and some fractured δ phase particles are clearly visible. This analysis highlights the high influence of a dent introduction on the initial microstructural state on a 100µm wide layer. b also shows that the heat treatment allows a rejuvenation of the microstructure with no remaining apparent signs of plastic deformation on SEM images.	0
Several authors investigate the influence of WEL on the fatigue strength of metallic materials . They note that the formation of WEL is often due to abusive machining conditions. For examples, the use of a worn tool or high removal rates or no coolant may lead to the formation of WEL. In order to further characterize the WEL, some authors use transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to determine the grain size in the WEL and to verify if any phase transformation occurs. These informations are used to evaluate the mechanism responsible for the formation of the WEL. Griffiths  describes three following possible mechanisms: severe plastic deformation, thermally driven phase transformation and surface reaction with the environment. As the introduction process of dent type surface anomalies simulates the fall of a screwdriver, it might be assumed here that neither environmental reaction nor high increase of the temperature occur. In this case, the most relevant hypothesis is that a severe plastic deformation is mostly responsible for the formation of the WEL below dents. Authors also reveal the harmfulness of this layer in fatigue. The hardness of WEL is higher and the Young modulus is lower than in the bulk material. These characteristics lead to a loss in ductility and to a reduction of the fatigue strength. Therefore it does not seem surprising to observe a short initiation fatigue life for dents with residual stresses where a WEL is present. Despite the effect of compressive residual stresses, the weakness of the WEL below the dent fractures early and causes a high reduction of the initiation fatigue life. This scenario is confirmed by the SEM observation of the fracture surface of a specimen monotonically fractured after only 200 cycles in fatigue.  shows the result of this analysis. After 200 cycles in fatigue, a 10µm deep smooth area is visible on the fracture surface (a and b). In comparison, this area is not observed on fracture surface of a specimen monotonically fractured without a previous fatigue loading (c and d). Therefore, it can be assumed that the smooth area corresponds to the fracture of the WEL at the bottom of the dent. It confirms that the presence of the WEL is the main reason of the fast crack initiation despite the compressive residual stresses.	0
For dents without residual stresses, due to the high temperature of the heat treatment, the WEL is absent and a standard grain morphology is observed at the bottom of the anomaly (b). It is shown  that recrystallization in Inconel 718 alloy may occur from 30h and 3000h of thermal exposure at 550°C. It can then easily be assumed in this study that recrystallization processes should have taken place during the sub-solvus solution treatment used to relax residual stresses. Compressive residual stresses are also relaxed, and then the high stress concentration due to the geometry contributes to the short initiation fatigue life. Nevertheless, these conditions lead still to a longer crack initiation than in the presence of a WEL and compressive residual stresses.	0
Generally, it is of interest to observe that a way to obtain the longest initiation fatigue life for dents could be to keep compressive residual stresses in sub-surface but to eliminate the WEL. Some authors  show that a thermal exposure at 550°C during 30h can lead to a recrystallization of the highly deformed surface layer without affecting significantly the residual stresses in sub-surface. It could be imagined to apply of a similar method to dents. The harmfulness of the WEL could be annihilated thanks to a recrystallization process without modifying the beneficial compressive residual stresses. The initial microstructural state would not accelerate the crack initiation in the same way and the initiation fatigue life could be the longest.	0
This analysis on dents revealed that a competition exists between the compressive residual stresses and the initial microstructural state to control the crack initiation fatigue life. For scratches, it seems that the damages generated in the microstructure during the machining process were not severe enough to counteract the effect of compressive residual stresses. SEM observations of the initial microstructural state below scratches show some signs of plastic deformations like distorted grains and shear bands (not shown here) but no WEL was formed during the introduction process. Therefore, it can be concluded that this type of damage does not present the same influence as a WEL on the initiation stage. For this type of surface anomaly, the main factor controlling the initiation fatigue life seems to be the compressive residual stresses. They slow down the crack initiation more than the plastic deformation under the scratches did accelerate it. Once again, a suitable thermal exposure could reduce the amount of plastic deformation under scratches without affecting the residual stresses and then enhance the initiation fatigue life. For both types of surface anomalies, this application seems of great interest from an industrial viewpoint in order to improve the initiation fatigue life. That was not investigated in more details in this study because the crack initiation corresponds to a very small part of the fatigue life and the main objective of the general study was to investigate the main mechanism controlling the fatigue life. This mechanism was found to occur in the first propagation stages.	0
For scratches, another difference is observed in the initiation sites. In the presence of residual stresses, cracks may initiate on a geometrical defect on the corner of the scratch while after the residual stresses relaxation, the bottom of the scratch constitutes the unique initiation site (). Two main reasons could explain this phenomenon. First, the residual stresses could favour crack initiation on this site. Indeed, their amplitude could be lower because of the introduction process. Secondly, the microstructural state might have suffered more at this site and thus it accelerates the crack initiation. This result highlights the need to accurately identify and measure the deformed layer under the anomalies and predict the residual stresses generated during their introduction. A recent study  show that the use of electron channelling contrast (ECC) is effective to qualitatively estimate the layers affected by plastic deformations.	0
Finally, it has to be noted that, after the relaxation of the residual stresses, for both scratches and dents, cracks initiate at the bottom of the anomaly, that is to say, where the stress concentration is the highest. Then, it seems that another competition takes place and controls the initiation stage between the compressive residual stresses and the stress concentration.	0
While several interactions between residual stresses, initial microstructural state and stress concentration control the crack initiation stage, it seems that the propagation stage is mainly influenced by the compressive residual stresses. Indeed, the stress concentration disturbs the stress field at the bottom of the anomalies in a limited zone. Finite elements simulations indicate that the stress is no longer impacted by the presence of the anomaly at a distance of at most 300µm from the bottom of the anomaly. This result is based on numerical calculations using a 2D ABAQUS CAE model described below which determine, using an isotropic constitutive behaviour, the stress field around the surface anomalies at the maximum load. Furthermore, microstructural damages are observed below scratches and dents only on the first 100µm near the anomalies. Therefore, these two factors present a high influence solely on the crack initiation stage which corresponds to the creation of 100µm deep crack from the bottom of anomalies. Residual stresses are then the only parameter which causes the reduction of the growth rate of cracks starting from scratches and dents. Indeed, the crack growth rate is reduced relatively to the crack growth rate of long cracks of the same length until a depth of 1mm for scratches and until the fracture for dents (cf. ). Moreover, the major part of the total fatigue life is spent in the propagation stage. Then, in order to accurately predict the fatigue life of cracks initiating from scratches and dents, it is important to take into account the residual stress effects.	0
Another important effect of the residual stresses concerns the propagation scenario. Indeed the results show some particular crack front shape evolution during the propagation from a scratch and a dent. It is interesting to note that several authors show a similar effect of the residual stress field introduced by low plasticity burnishing  or laser shock peening  on the crack front shape. Specific tools have then to be used to characterize the residual stress field around surface anomalies. An affected zone can be identified with the micro-indentation technique but the quantitative evaluation of residual stresses is not possible with this method. This is the reason why finite elements simulations were realized to determine the residual stress field generated by the fabrication of a dent. Numerical modelling of a scratch introduction was not achieved because the introduction process of this type of surface anomalies is particularly complex. Indeed, it would be necessary to simulate successively an indentation and then the machining of the scratch on the material. On the other hand, the fabrication process of dent type surface anomalies corresponds only to an indentation. Numerous studies described the numerical modelling of the introduction of similar anomalies like foreign object damage  or Vickers indentation . Boyce et al.  emphasized that for moderate impact velocity (inferior to 200m/s) a quasi static simulation is able to accurately predict the residual stresses generated below a dent. Therefore, a finite element modelling similar to that conducted by Boyce and al. has been developed in this study using the commercial code ABAQUS CAE. The indenter is modelled as a rigid solid. The calculation simulates its movement into the material until a depth of 200µm and then its removal. The substrate material is taken to be plastic and its behaviour obeys to an isotropic plastic constitutive law. A rigid contact is modelled in the normal direction between the indenter and the material while a Coulomb friction is used to simulate the tangential contact. Without any accurate data concerning the friction coefficient, the value of the friction coefficient is taken to be 0.1 as it is used in the literature , meaning nearly frictionless conditions. In the finite element simulation, after the indentation step, a tension load to the model equal to the maximum stress used in the experimental fatigue tests is applied. The field of the normal stresses obtained below a dent after these steps is presented in (a) and explains the crack front shape evolution for cracks initiated from dents as illustrated in (b). Indeed, it can be seen on the stress profiles following the blue and red paths in (c) that high compressive residual stresses still exist below a dent in depth. However, the affected zone by compressive stresses in the normal direction (blue path) is deeper than in the corner direction of the dent (red path). The growth reduction of a crack starting from a dent should then be longer in the normal direction than in the corner direction. This is the reason why the crack front is ear-shaped once the crack front overpasses the extension of the compressive stresses in the corner direction and touches tension stresses while the crack front in the normal direction is still delayed in the affected zone. It has to be noted that the quantitative value of the stresses evaluated by the numerical calculation are not presented here because they are presumably not representative from the actual stresses prevailing below a dent during the crack propagation. This is due to the fact that the calculation does not take into account the thermal and mechanical relaxation of the residual stresses. Nevertheless this simulation permits to qualitatively assess the behaviour of cracks starting from dent type surface anomalies.	0
This study was undertaken to understand the fatigue life of DA Inconel 718 alloy containing surface anomalies. The influence of residual stresses on the initiation and propagation stages of cracks starting from scratches and dents was investigated with this aim. The main experimental and modelling results are summarized in the following.	0
A specially designed heat treatment has been designed and applied to relax the residual stresses generated during the fabrication process of scratch and dent surface anomalies. Their influence on the fatigue strength of DA 718 alloy containing scratches and dents was characterised. The microstructure of the material was only slightly modified by the heat treatment but this does not seem to affect the fatigue behaviour of the material.	0
Residual stresses delay the crack growth during the first stages of propagation in comparison with the long crack growth behaviour. In the case where they are relaxed after the heat treatment, the typical long crack behaviour is observed. Residual stresses also strongly influence the evolution of the crack front shape.	0
The initiation fatigue life is strongly related to the presence of compressive residual stresses and to the competition between the stress concentration induced by the anomaly geometry and the initial microstructural state generated at the bottom of the anomalies. For dents, the initiation fatigue life is short due to the presence of a White Etching Layer at the bottom of the anomaly, while the high stress concentration factor is the main responsible for the short crack initiation life from scratches.	0
The determination of the residual stress field generated by the fabrication of surface anomalies appears as a key point to accurately predict the fatigue life of DA 718 alloy containing scratches and dents. A preliminary finite element modelling for a simple indentation comparable to the introduction of dents accounts for the “ear-shaped” crack front observed for cracks emanating from dents. For scratches, more sophisticated experimental or numerical methods are required to characterise the residual stress field below surface anomalies whose fabrication process is complex.	0
The authors are grateful to  group for financial support and for providing the material.	0
Ni coated MWCNTs with two types of thickness are achieved by electroless plating.	0
Most of the MWCNTs are transformed into the graphene nano sheets and fragments.	0
Inter-bonding of graphene fragments results in the carbon nano ribbons formation.	0
Carbon nano products suppressed the element segregation and Laves phase formation.	0
IN718 is a kind of nickel-based superalloy strengthened by γ″-Ni3Nb and γ′-Ni3Al precipitation phases, which has been widely used in the components operating under the high temperature up to 650–700 °C [,]. Due to the outstanding mechanical strength in the high temperature, excellent formability and relatively low cost, IN718 superalloy occupies over 50 wt% usage of nickel-based superalloy in the modern aero-engines [,]. As one of the promising additive manufacturing technologies, laser cladding technology can fabricate the near-net-shape products layer by layer with excellent metallurgical bonding and relatively low cost []. When using a coaxial powder feeding system, laser cladding also has a higher powder depositing efficiency and flexibility compared with other bed-based additive manufacturing technologies like Selective Laser Melting (SLM), and it is therefore highly desirable in the repair of the high-valued nickel-based superalloy components like turbine blades, vanes, blisks, etc. [,].	0
During the rapid solidification of laser cladding, the time provided is too short to precipitate the γ″ or γ′ phases. Instead, large amount of Laves phase is produced by the Laves/γ eutectic reaction due to the high degree of interdendritic element segregation in the last stage of solidification [,]. The Laves phase is a brittle intermetallic compound, which is normally expressed as the formula of (Ni, Cr, Fe)2(Nb, Mo, Ti) []. The formation of Laves phase not only depletes the valuable alloying elements like Nb and Mo, but also improves the initiation and propagation of the liquation cracking in the laser cladding of IN718 superalloy []. In the last decade, much effort has been paid to depress the Laves phase formation in the rapid solidification of laser cladding. Zhang et al. [] showed that the cooling rate is a critical factor that controlling the Laves phase formation and by increasing the cooling rate in the liquid nitrogen, the Laves phase can be suppressed greatly. Nie et al. [] and Zhu et al. [] found that high cooling rate and low temperature gradient to growth rate (G/R) are beneficial for forming the fine and discrete Laves phase particles. Zhong et al. [] demonstrated that the Gas Atomized (GA) IN718 powder results in the higher production of Laves phase than the IN718 powders fabricated by the Plasma-rotating Electrode Process (PREP). Liu et al. [] proved that by using a hybrid electromagnetic stirring process, the Laves phase formation can be depressed effectively and improvements of 100 MPa in tensile strength and 22% in elongation can be achieved. Song et al. [,] found that compared with the continuous wave laser, the cooling rate in the quasi-continuous-wave laser is improved one order of magnitude, and correspondingly, the Laves phase is depressed from about 11.6 vol% to 3.7 vol%, and the tensile strength of the as-fabricated IN718 superalloy after aging treatment is improved effectively from 1269.2 MPa to 1404.1 MPa.	0
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are widely accepted as one of the promising quasi-one-dimensional nano reinforcements due to their low density, large aspect ratio and extremely high mechanical strength []. Unfortunately, due to the high energy intensity of the heating source, it is very difficult to incorporate the CNTs into the laser additive manufactured alloy. However, using the similar high energy heating sources like plasma flame, it was demonstrated by Laha et al. [] and Bakshi et al. [] that the CNTs reinforced Al composite coating can still be fabricated successfully by plasma spraying. The key technical treatment they proposed is thought to be the pre-treatment on the powders, i.e., the CNTs are partially embedded inside the Al powders through the ball milling or spray drying treatments and as a result, the Al coating on the surfaces of the CNTs can somewhat act as a thermal shield protecting the CNTs from the thermal destruction during the plasma spraying. It has also been reported that during the ball milling process, the CNTs reinforced Al and Cu composite powders were firstly flattened, and then inter-welded, forming the near spherical composite powders [,]. During this typical structural evolution, the CNTs can be embedded inside the composite powders. However, it is found that this typical evolution of the powders can only be performed on the alloys with high ductility like Al and Cu, etc. But for Ni, it can hardly be achieved due to the relatively low ductility. To incorporate the CNTs into the laser additive manufactured IN718, we previously coated the NiP protective layer on the surfaces of CNTs. The results showed that with the addition of the NiP coated CNTs, the liquation cracking resistance and tensile strength of the as-deposited IN718 alloy are both improved effectively but unfortunately, the Laves phase in it is undesirably promoted []. As well known, the addition of P element can widen the solidus-liquidus temperature interval of the nickel-based superalloy, resulting in the increase of the element segregation in the solidification []. To suppress the Laves phase formation, in the present study, the P element was eliminated by using a new chemical solution in the electroless plating. The structural evolution of the MWCNTs during laser cladding was further studied and the effect of the MWCNTs addition on the element segregation and Laves phase formation was also discussed.	0
The reinforcement material used were commercial multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) with 30–50 nm in diameter and 10–20 μm in length (Chengdu Organic Chemistry Co., Ltd., China). The depositing material used was Gas Atomized spherical IN718 superalloy powder with a particle size of 100–150 μm. The substrate material used was the solution heat treated IN718 with a dimension of 10 mm × 6 mm × 120 mm.	1
In order to incorporate the CNTs into the laser additive manufactured IN718 superalloy successfully, the raw MWCNTs were firstly treated by the electroless plating of Ni coating. As shown in , the as-received MWCNTs were firstly immersed into the concentrated nitric acid and hydrofluoric acid in turn for 48 h and 24 h, respectively. After filtering and washing by the de-ionized water, the purified MWCNTs were sensitized in an aqueous solution of 0.1 M SnCl2/0.1 M HCl at room temperature for 24 h. After washing, the MWCNTs were then activated in an aqueous solution of 0.0014 M PdCl2/0.25 M HCl at room temperature for another 24 h. After washing, the MWCNTs were immersed into the plating solution for the electroless plating of Ni. The chemical composition and bath conditions used for the electroless plating were displayed in . At the beginning of the plating, the plating solution was in dark blue color. With the reaction of the plating, a lot of bubbles were generated and the blue color of the plating solution was faded gradually. When the plating solution was transformed into the transparent feature with no more production of the bubbles, it was identified as the termination of the plating. To achieve a higher thickness of the Ni coating, the plating solution was then replaced by the new fresh plating solution. After that, the plating reaction could be restarted again. In the present study, the plating reaction was repeated 3 and 6 times, and the MWCNTs content in the as-plated Ni-coated CNTs (NiCNTs) were measured to be about 1 wt% and 0.5 wt%, respectively. Correspondingly, the as-achieved NiCNTs powders after 3 and 6 times plating were termed as Ni1CNTs and Ni0.5CNTs, respectively. After the electroless plating, the NiCNTs powders were dried in an air-blast drying closet at 80 °C for 6 h and a vacuum drying oven at 120 °C for 3 h, respectively. And in order to achieve a good flowability, the composite powders were grinded into a particle size of above 100 mesh manually.	1
The laser additive layers were fabricated by a laser cladding system equipped with a coaxial powder feeding nozzle and a 2 kW high power diode laser unit (Laseline LDF400-2000). The diameter of the focused laser beam is about Φ4 mm. The powder feeding system was equipped with double powder feeding cylinders. The powders could be mixed inner the feeding tubes simultaneously during the powder delivery process. The feeding rate of the powders in each of the cylinders could be adjusted individually, and as a result, the content of each powder in the as-deposited alloy could be controlled. To study the microstructural evolution of the MWCNTs, the Ni1CNTs and Ni0.5CNTs powders were deposited into single-track additive layers. And to study the effect of MWCNTs addition on the element segregation and Laves phase formation of IN718, the single-track laser additive manufactured IN718 and IN718 with 10 wt% addition of Ni, Ni1CNTs and Ni0.5CNTs were also fabricated, which were termed as IN718, IN718-10Ni, IN718-10Ni1CNTs and IN718-10Ni0.5CNTs additive layers, respectively. The main depositing parameters used were listed as follows: laser power of 600 W, laser scanning speed of 2 mm/s, and powder feeding rate of 6 g/min.	1
The transverse sections were cut from the center of the as-deposited alloys. The sections were then mounted, polished and chemically etched in a solution of 100 mL C2H5OH + 100 mL HCl + 5 g CuCl2. The preparation of the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) samples was involved the pre-thinning of the sampes down to 50–60 μm, and then electropolishing by a twin-jet system in a 10 vol% perchloric acid alcohol at a voltage of 30 V and temperature of −20 °C. The phase identification was conducted by the X-Ray Diffractomery (XRD, D8 ADVANCE DA VINCI, Bruker) using a Cu Kα radiation with a scanning speed of 5°/min. The microstructure of the as-deposited alloys was studied by the Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM, EVO 18, Carl Zeiss) and the degree of element segregation was analyzed by the Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (EDS, XFlash 6130, Bruker). The TEM microstructural evolution of the MWCNTs was investigated by a TEM system (2100F, JOEL) operating at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV.	1
The microstructure of the electrolessly plated NiCNTs composite powders is shown in . Attributed to the growth of Ni, the MWCNTs are inter-bonded with the neighouring ones, which results in the formation of the large porous composite powders, as shown in (a). To achieve a good flowability of the powders, the as-plated powders were manually grinded into the size of above 100 mesh. As shown in (b), after the grinding, the powders have a particle size of about 20–100 μm. During the sensitization and activation treatments of the MWCNTs, large amount of Pd particles can be doped on the surfaces of the MWCNTs. Using these Pd particles as the nucleation sites, the Ni can be deposited on the surfaces of the MWCNTs, which eventually results in the formation of the continuous electrolessly plated layers [,]. As shown in (c), after 3 times plating, homogeneous Ni layers are deposited on the surfaces of the MWCNTs. The tubular-like morphology of the MWCNTs can still be observed, but the diameter of them are improved from the initial 30–50 nm to about 300 nm. Further increases the electroless plating time to 6, the tubular-like morphology disappears due to the thicker deposition of the Ni layer, as shown in (d).	0
 shows the microstructure and EDS spectrum of the as-plated Ni1CNTs composite powder. It can be revealed from (b) that the deposited layer on the surfaces of the MWCNTs contains mostly of Ni. Due to the high thickness deposition of the Ni layer on the MWCNTs, the C peak achieved is weakened. A weak O peak is also detected, which is believed to be attributed to the oxidation groups like –OH, –CO, –COOH, etc. induced in the concentrated nitric acid and hydrofluoric acid in the purification process.	0
 displays the XRD spectra of the as-received MWCNTs and the as-plated NiCNTs composite powders. It is clear that the diffraction peak of (002) crystal plane (i.e., the tubular surfaces of the MWCNTs) is highly strong, which indicates the high purification of the MWCNTs. After the electroless plating, the typical diffraction peaks of C in the as-plated Ni1CNTs and Ni0.5CNTs powders are not detected, which is also considered to be attributed to the thick deposition of Ni layer on the MWCNTs. To eliminate the element of P, in the present study, the hydrazine hydrate with strong reducibility is used as the reducing agent but not the NaH2PO2 widely used in the other previous published papers [,]. As shown in , only Ni diffraction peaks can be detected in the as-plated Ni1CNTs and Ni0.5CNTs powders, which proves the fabrication of P-free coating on the surfaces of the MWCNTs.	0
 shows the transverse sectional microstructure of the as-deposited Ni1CNTs and Ni0.5CNTs layers. During laser cladding, the high energy laser beam creates extremely high thermal gradient in the molten pool, which results in the formation of epitaxial growth of columnar dendrites both in the Ni1CNTs and Ni0.5CNTs additive layers. Attributed to the high cooling rate generated in the solidification of laser cladding, the formed dendrites are very fine. The primary dendrite spacing is measured to be 10–20 μm. And owing to the highly directional heat dissipation in the solidification, the growth of primary dendrites is well developed whereas the growth of secondary dendrites in the interdendritic regions is highly depressed.	0
 shows the microstructure of the as-deposited Ni1CNTs alloy on the substrate of IN718 superalloy. Due to the dilution of the substrate alloy, the element segregation and Laves phase formation are still generated in the as-deposited Ni1CNTs layer, which is consistent with the microstructure of IN718 superalloy, as shown in (a). However, the Laves phase particles formed in the Ni1CNTs alloy are discretely finer in contrast with that in the laser deposited IN718 superalloy in our previously published papers [,]. The decrease in the Laves phase formation may attributed to the dilution of Ni and the addition of the MWCNTs. On the one hand, the composition of IN718 superalloy is highly diluted by the high concentration of Ni in the Ni1CNTs composite powder. Therefore, elements like Nb, Mo, Ti, etc. resulting in the Laves phase formation are reduced in the additive layer. On the other hand, as shown in (b), due to the addition of MWCNTs, large amount of black film-like phase is generated in the as-deposited Ni1CNTs alloy. According to our previous study, this phase is typically named as the carbon nano ribbons (CNRs), which is produced through the microstructural evolution of MWCNTs []. As shown in (b), large amount of CNRs are produced in the interdendritic regions of the Ni1CNTs alloy, and attributed to the formation of the CNRs, the Laves phase is separated into the finer discrete particles. It can then be revealed that the Laves phase formation is greatly suppressed by the transformed CNRs in the rapid solidification of laser cladding.	0
To further confirm the phase identification, the EDS analysis was conducted and the results are shown in . It is clear that the concentration of C is distinctly higher in the locations of those dark grey regions (where black arrows are highlighted in the selected region), as shown in (a) and (b). It proves that the dark film-like phase is composed mostly by C. And it can also be revealed that the bright white phases in the selected region in (a) have higher concentration of Nb and Mo, lower concentration of Ni, which is consistent with the chemical composition of Laves phase. Therefore, the dark grey phase is identified as the CNRs transformed from the MWCNTs and the bright white particles is identified as the Laves phase by the eutectic reaction in the last stage of solidification in the present study.	0
 shows the microstructure of the as-deposited Ni0.5CNTs alloy. Different from the microstructure of Ni1CNTs layer, the Laves phase in the Ni0.5CNTs alloy can hardly be observed. Moreover, a lot of pores in the size of several micrometers are widely formed in the interdendritic regions, as shown in (a). The detailed morphology of the transformed film-like graphene nano sheet (GNS) is depicted in . And it can also be observed that almost all the area in the selected region in (b) are homogeneously covered by the transformed GNSs and CNRs. Moreover, it is shown in (a) that almost all the pores generated are located in the interdendritic regions and most of them are rhombic. And as highlighted by the white arrows in (a)–(d), inside the pores, a spherical particle can widely be observed. Also, inner some of the pores, the film-like GNS detaching from the metal matrix can also be distinguished, as shown in (c). Based on the microstructural findings above, a proper mechanism of the pores formation is proposed as follows: during the melting process of laser cladding, the GNSs and CNRs are produced in the molten pool and in some cases, partial liquid is trapped inside the GNSs/CNRs surrounding, forming the separate liquid droplets. Attributed to the poor wetting property between the GNSs/CNRs and metal liquid, the separate droplets can easily be pushed to the last remaining liquid in the interdendritic regions during the dendritic growth process in the solidification. Once the droplets are trapped by the solid, the liquid inside the separate droplets can hardly be re-filled by the liquid flow of the molten pool due to the surrounding of the GNSs/CNRs covering. With the decrease of the temperature, the separate droplets shrink in the solidification. And when the volume reduction of the droplets exceeds a critical size, the droplets are detached from the metal matrix, leaving the interdendritic pores formation and small particles inside them. The rhombic shape of the pores are believed to be attributed to the typical growth of the dendrites. As shown in (c), dendrites grow in the rhombic columns in the microscopic scale. (d) shows the microstructure of the collapsed MWCNTs and the transformed CNRs in the growth tips of the dendrites. It has been proved that with the addition of nanoparticles, the diffusion path of the elements can be enlarged and in turn, the microstructure of the alloy can be refined []. In the present study, with the large surface area covering of the carbon nano products in the heads of the growth tips, it is believed that the element diffusion process can also be hindered effectively. And in a consequence, the element segregation and Laves phase formation are both depressed.	0
The initial MWCNTs content in the Ni1CNTs is twice of that in the Ni0.5CNTs. However, it is distinct that the carbon nano products, i.e., the collapsed MWCNTs, the transformed GNSs and CNRs in the metal matrix are more widely dispersed in the Ni0.5CNTs alloy than that in the Ni1CNTs alloy. It is then believed that the low production of the carbon nano products in the Ni1CNTs alloy are mainly attributed to the low survival of the MWCNTs in the laser cladding processing. Due to the low thickness of the Ni coating on the surfaces of MWCNTs in the Ni1CNTs composite powder, most of the MWCNTs are burn out by the high energy of the laser beam and high temperature heating of the molten pool. While, the thickness of the deposited Ni coating in the Ni0.5CNTs is improved, as shown in (c) and (d). The higher thickness of the Ni coating correspondingly provides greater shielding effect, which in turn reduces the direct irradiation of the laser beam and thermal destruction of the molten pool more effectively.  shows the SEM microstructure and EDS mapping results of the Ni0.5CNTs alloy. It is shown that the Laves phase in the Ni0.5CNTs alloy are reduced to the size of about 100 nm, which proves the fact that attributed to the higher retaining of the carbon nano products, more effective depression effect on the element segregation and Laves phase formation is provided in the laser cladding of the Ni0.5CNTs alloy on the substrate of IN718 superalloy.	0
 shows the TEM microstructure of the carbon nano products transformed during the laser cladding processing in the Ni1CNTs and Ni0.5CNTs layers. (a) shows the typical microstructure of the CNR observed widely in the as-deposited Ni1CNTs layer. It can be revealed that the porous CNR is consisted of the inter-bonded graphene fragments. It has been reported by Bang et al. [] that under the laser beam irradiation, the tubular walls of the MWCNTs in the ethanol can be unzipped due to the great stress induced inner the walls of the MWCNTs, resulting in the formation of the GNSs. This typical transformation phenomenon from the MWCNTs to GNSs was also observed in our previous work []. While, different from Bang's work, the MWCNTs in the present work are dispersed into the high temperature molten pool but not the ethanol. Under the high temperature heating, the transformed GNSs can further be destructed into lots of graphene fragments. And during the rapid cooling process of laser cladding, these graphene fragments can then be inter-bonded with the neighboring ones, resulting in the porous CNRs formation eventually. While as shown in (b), some of the tubular-like structure of the MWCNTs can still be observed in the transformed CNRs in the Ni0.5CNTs. It can be identified as the fact that attributed to the higher thickness of the Ni coating on the surfaces of MWCNTs in the Ni0.5CNTs powder, the perfection of the graphene structure in the GNSs and CNRs in the as-deposited Ni0.5CNTs layer is improved. And as elucidated in (c), excluding the CNRs formation, large areas of GNSs are also widely be generated in the laser deposited Ni0.5CNTs layer, which is also considered as the result of the increased protection on the graphene structure during the laser cladding process. The content of the MWCNTs in the Ni0.5CNTs powder is one time lower than that in the Ni1CNTs powder. However, it should be noted that the transformed CNRs and GNSs are more frequently observed in the Ni0.5CNTs layer than that in the Ni1CNTs layer, despite the fact that in some of the cases, the GNSs observed is very thin, as shown in (d). The production of the CNRs and GNSs provides large surface area inside the laser deposited layer. It is then believed that the large surface areas of the CNRs and GNSs inhibit the atom movement in the solidification. Consequently, the element segregation and Laves phase formation in the laser rapid solidified IN718 superalloy are suppressed.	0
It can be concluded from  that attributed to the low thickness of the Ni layer, most of the MWCNTs in the Ni1CNTs are burned out by the high energy laser beam and high temperature molten pool. While, with the increase of the Ni layer thickness in Ni0.5CNTs, more graphene structure transformed from the MWCNTs are retained in the laser deposited layer. Moreover, it can be observed from  that most of the retained graphene fragments in Ni1CNTs agglomerate together to form the dark CNRs. While as shown in , the CNRs in the Ni0.5CNTs layer are in much lighter color, which indicates the lower degree of the graphene fragment agglomeration. And according to the TEM results in , it can also be revealed that the graphene fragment distribution is more homogeneous in Ni0.5CNTs than that in the Ni1CNTs. Consequently, the effective area depressing the element segregation and Laves phase formation by the added graphene fragment structure in Ni0.5CNTs is greater than that in the Ni1CNTs.	0
To further evaluate the effect of the MWCNTs addition on the element segregation and Laves phase formation of IN718 superalloy during the rapid solidification of laser cladding, IN718-10Ni1CNTs and IN718-10Ni0.5CNTs additive alloys were fabricated. And for the comparison, IN718 and IN718-10Ni alloys were also deposited. As shown in (a) and (b), the Laves phase formed in the IN718-10Ni alloy is almost the same with that of IN718 additive layer. However, with 10 wt% addition of Ni1CNTs, the Laves phase formation in the IN718-10Ni1CNTs alloy is greatly reduced, as shown in (c). And with the addition of Ni0.5CNTs, the Laves phase in the IN718-10Ni0.5CNTs is further reduced, as shown in (d). Through the binarized quantitative metallography image processing, the Laves phase formation in the IN718, IN718-10Ni, IN718-10Ni1CNTs and IN718-10Ni0.5CNTs are measured as 13.3 vol%, 12.6 vol%, 8.8 vol% and 7.4 vol%, respectively. This further proves the fact that the depression effect on the Laves phase formation is attributed mostly to the carbon nano products transformed from the retained MWCNTs but not the electrolessly plated Ni element. With the higher thickness of the Ni coating, the production of the carbon nano products in the Ni0.5CNTs is higher than that in the Ni1CNTs. In the consequence, more profound depression effect on the element segregation and Laves phase formation is provided by the large surface of the net-like or film-like morphology of the GNSs, CNRs and collapsed MWCNTs in the as-deposited IN718-10Ni0.5CNTs alloy.	0
Two types of Ni coated MWCNTs, i.e. Ni1CNTs and Ni0.5CNTs were electrolessly plated. The structural evolution of the MWCNTs under the high energy laser beam irradiation and high temperature molten pool heating was investigated. And the effect of the Ni1CNTs and Ni0.5CNTs addition on the element segregation and Laves phase formation of IN718 superalloy was also studied. The main findings are summarized as follows:	0
The MWCNTs can be partially retained, but most of the tubes are unzipped into the GNSs and graphene fragments, which are further inter-bonded with the neighboring ones, forming the large porous CNRs in the laser additive layer.	0
The Ni1CNTs and Ni0.5CNTs composite powders provide profound suppression effect on the element segregation and Laves phase formation of IN718 superalloy, which is considered to be attributed mostly to the large surface areas of the transformed GNSs and CNRs.	0
Due to the higher thickness of the Ni coating, the depression effect provided by the Ni0.5CNTs powder on the element segregation and Laves phase formation of IN718 superalloy is greater than that provided by the Ni1CNTs powder.	0
This work was supported by the  (Grant No. ), and  Cooperation Project of the Belt and Road Initiative (Grant No. ).	0
Conventional (YSZ) and new generation (Gd2Zr2O7) TBC top coat materials were deposited on cold sprayed CoNiCrAlY bond coats using EB-PVD technique.	0
Oxidation tests were carried out on the TBC samples at 1100 °C in a time-dependent manner.	0
Although Gd2Zr2O7-TBC has better oxidation resistance with respect to TGO thickness, YSZ-TBC with higher fracture toughness will be more reliable in long service time.	0
In gas turbine engines, thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) are generally deposited onto superalloys to decrease turbine inlet temperature and to obtain higher efficiency and endurance of hot section components . Generally, a TBC system consists of two different layers as bond coat (MCrAlY; M=Co, Ni or Co/Ni) and ceramic top coat. Bond coat reduces the thermal expansion mismatch and provides better adhesion between the top coat and the substrate, increasing the oxidation and corrosion resistance, whereas top coating structure reduces the thermal conductivity and protects the metallic parts against the adverse effects of high temperatures . Several processes are used for production of bond coat such as atmospheric plasma spray (APS), high velocity oxy fuel (HVOF), low pressure plasma spray (LPPS) and cold gas dynamic spray (CGDS). However, only a few deposition processes such as APS and Electron Beam Physical Vapor Deposition (EB-PVD) are available for the top coats with high melting point .	0
CGDS system enables deposition on substrate material in lower temperatures when compared to other thermal spray process. In this technique, powder is deposited on the substrate by means of the supersonic gas jet reaching to a critical velocity. Upon impact, powders become plastically deformed . Another important advantage of this process is that powders do not oxidize due to deposition with low temperature. Depletion of Al-rich phases significantly decrease during the deposition . Thus, CGDS process provides an advantage for better oxidation resistance. In EB-PVD system, process occurs through deposition of evaporated ingot on heated substrate from molten pool with the aid of high vapor pressure in vacuum atmosphere. Intra-columnar fine porosities cause to fall thermal conductivity in EB-PVD while obtained columnar structure provides high strain tolerance and adhesion to bond coat for TBCs . TBCs are exposed to harsh environments such as oxidation, corrosion, CMAS (CaO, MgO, Al2O3 and SiO2) attack or erosion under service conditions. From this point of view, TBC components should be improved and alternative materials should be developed especially for the top coat of TBC systems .	0
As top coat material, Yttria Stabilized Zirconia (YSZ) is conventionally preferred in TBC systems because of its low thermal conductivity and high coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) which is close to metals . However, above 1200°C, YSZ is exposed to phase transformation from tetragonal phase to tetragonal and monoclinic phase with an increase in the sintering effect . The main characteristic of a top coat is its ability to reduce the heat transfer to the substrate. This is directly related with the thermal conductivity of the top coat. Lattice defects result in phonon scattering in materials. Thus, thermal conductivity can decrease depending on increased lattice defects. Similarly, fine grain structures, point defects, oxygen vacancies, porosities and inclusions contribute to the decrease in the thermal conductivity . Melting point of rare-earth zirconates (Re2Zr2O7) such as Gd2Zr2O7, Sm2Zr2O7 or La2Zr2O7 are above 2000°C. In addition, phase transformation temperatures of rare-earth zirconates are higher than YSZ. Their CTE is close to that of YSZ. However, toughness values of Re2Zr2O7 are lower than YSZ . Ion doping, heavier than Y3+, decreases the thermal conductivity because of increasing atomic weight. Substitution of Zr4+ with rare earth zirconates causes formation of oxygen vacancy. One oxygen vacancy similar to YSZ and great number of displaced oxygen atoms provide lower thermal conductivity . There are two main oxygen transfer mechanisms in oxidation. The first one is the ionic diffusion which is related to the top coat structure, and the second one is the penetration of gas through porosities and micro-cracks. Oxygen diffuses to interface and sub-interface through ionic conductivity of top coating at high temperatures and also, inter-columnar voids and porosities simplify oxygen penetration .	0
In this study, Gd2Zr2O7 and YSZ were deposited on CoNiCrAlY coated Inconel 718 substrates using EB-PVD technique. Then, the produced TBCs were subjected to isothermal oxidation tests with different periods at 1100°C in furnace to make a comparison between their oxidation performances.	1
Inconel 718 disk samples having 25mm diameter and 5mm height were used as the substrate material. Before the deposition of the bond coat, samples were grit blasted using Al2O3 powder with 40±5μm particle size under 2.5bar pressure at 75° angle with horizontal axis.	1
CoNiCrAlY (Co - 32Ni - 21Cr - 8Al - 0.5Y (wt.%)) powders (−38+5.5μm particle size, Amdry 9951-Sulzer Metco) were sprayed on the substrates using CGDS technique. The ceramic ingots were used for deposition of top coats. YSZ (ZrO2–8wt.%Y2O3) ceramic ingot has 68.5mm diameter and 40–50mm height while Gd2Zr2O7 (Gd2O3–30vol.% ZrO2) ceramic ingot has 68.5mm diameter and 40–60mm height. The main difference in deposition of YSZ and Gd2Zr2O7 ingots was observed in their condensation ratio (4,5μm/min and 3,7μm/min, respectively). The spray parameters of the bond coats and the deposition parameters of the YSZ and Gd2Zr2O7 top coats, produced by EB-PVD (UE-202, Kiev, Ukraine) technique, are given in .	1
Porosity contents of TBCs were calculated using ImageJ software program by taking the percentage of the porous area in overall area of the analyzed coating cross-section. Mean porosity values were calculated using 10 different SEM backscattered electron detector (BSD) images of each coating at 1,5kx before the oxidation test. Surface roughness values of the bond coats and the top coats were evaluated using SJ-310, Mitutoyo instrument. Roughness measurements were conducted with 0.8mm cut off length, 4mm measurement distance and 0.5mm/s indenter speed, 4mN measuring force, 5μm stylus radius, 90° conical taper angle. 5 measurements were taken from the top surface of each coating to calculate average roughness values.	1
Vacuum heat treatment with 10−5Torr pressure and 2h at 1080°C was applied to TBCs before the oxidation tests. The main purpose of this process is to obtain thin Al2O3 layer and β-NiAl phases rich in Al phases. Isothermal oxidation test in air atmosphere was carried out on TBC samples using Protherm high temperature furnace (PLF 130/12, Turkey) under 1100°C for 8, 24, 50 and 100h periods. The heating rate was 8°C/min and the cooling rate was 5°C/min. Isothermally oxidized TBC samples were examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and elemental mapping spectroscopy. X-ray diffractometer (XRD) Cu Kα radiation was applied to identify the presence of the phase transformation of oxidized TBC samples using the data obtained from the top coat surface. The TGO thickness measurements included the measurement of mixed oxides and Al2O3. TGO thicknesses of all oxidized TBC samples were measured at 3kx magnification using Image Pro Plus 6 software program. 15 measurements were taken from each of 10 different SEM images during TGO thickness measurements (150 measurements in total), and the mean TGO thickness was evaluated for each image. Finally, the average of the mean values of all images was taken to evaluate the overall TGO thickness average.	0
As-sprayed bond coat structure and XRD spectrum are given in . The thickness of the bond coat layer is approximately 100μm. Bond coats of the TBCs were homogenously coated. In the microstructure analysis of the bond coat, porosity content is at a quite low level (0,65±0,2) % compared to other studies . The areas close to the surface include porosities in the bond coat due to the characteristics of the CGDS technique . CoNiCrAlY surface morphology exhibited small-sized undeformed particles which result in a rough bond coat surface. This can be ascribed to the facilitated deposition of initial particles by the impact of subsequent particles whereas the final particles do not have such impacting support . Furthermore, oxide structure is not visible in the bond coat according to the SEM examination due to the use of inert He gases and the kinetics of using CGDS technique during spraying. According to the XRD results of as-sprayed bond coat, there is only one phase which consists of γ-phase rich in Co and Ni. Severe plastic deformation causes grain refinements. Thus, β-NiAl phases can be dissolved into the γ-matrix . Porosity and surface roughness values of the substrate and bond coating are given in . Porosity  and surface roughness  values of bond coat affect the oxidation behavior TBC system.	1
The cross-sectional microstructure of YSZ and Gd2Zr2O7 TBC system is illustrated in . Thickness of the top coat layer is approximately 200μm. Both top coatings showed a columnar structure as the common characteristic of EB-PVD coatings. Columnar growing and vertical separation of evaporated ingots provide low porosity in EB-PVD coatings. Since APS coating is deposited on the substrate in the form of splats, it has high porosity content. During the EB-PVD deposition, the used parameters such as rotation speed, chamber pressure, substrate temperature or condensation ratio affect the top coat porosity. There are visible inter-columnar voids in the top coat structure. This can also be attributed to the surface roughness of the bond coat . Because, growing morphology of columns is affected from bond coat roughness. Growing columns can intersect with each other. As a result, porosities and vertical separation between columns occur. Porosity and surface roughness values of the top coats are given in .	1
TBCs were exposed to vacuum annealing to get a thin α-Al2O3 layer at the interface, to enable general stabilization of the coating, to facilitate the formation of β-NiAl phases and to provide better adhesion of the ceramic layer to the metal bond coat .	1
After deposition of TBCs, TGO layer is quite visible as a result of vacuum annealing according to as-sprayed SEM examination and mapping microstructure (). In addition, homogeneous β-NiAl and γ-phases dispersion in the bond coat was observed in . Colors of Al and O2 elements overlap in . Also, Cr colors are not seen in these areas. This is an advantage of CGDS process due to the high spray velocity and the presence of inert gas atmosphere during coating process. Normally, presence of β-NiAl phases was not detected in SEM. Because, severe plastically deformed particles provide grain refinements which may induce dissolution of β-NiAl phases in γ-matrix. These phases can be observed under high magnifications  before the vacuum annealing but they can be detected after vacuum annealing which gives sufficient energy for their formation.	1
Cross-sectional SEM microstructures of YSZ and Gd2Zr2O7 TBCs for each different period are given in  after the oxidation tests. Thin darker oxide scales represent continuous Al2O3 layer whereas grey areas can show spinel or mixed oxide formations. They can be understood from elemental mapping of 100h oxidized samples (). Dark colors in SEM image coincide with Al and O2 colors in elemental mapping microstructures. Grey colors overlap with colors of Co, Ni, Cr and O2 elements in mapping images.	1
In the first stage of oxidation, there is no visible mixed oxide formation while after 50h oxidation period, mixed oxide formation can be clearly observed according to SEM microstructure. Formation of TGO at the interface of the top coat and the bond coat causes residual stress. Substantial increase in stress during TGO growth induces spallation of top coat from bond coat . In TBC microstructures, micro-crack formations occurred after 50 and 100h oxidation period, because of thermal stresses. However, no spallation of coatings was observed during the oxidation experiments. TGO layers for both coating structures prevent its uniformity.	0
Elemental mapping microstructures of YSZ and Gd2Zr2O7 TBCs after 100h oxidation period are given in . According to the mapping results, TGO layer mainly consists of Al2O3 and mixed oxides such as spinels, Cr, Ni and Co oxides for YSZ and Gd2Zr2O7 TBC. Al2O3 formation is desirable for TBC because of lower oxygen permeability compared to mixed oxides. However, depleted NiAl phases cause diffusion of other elements to interface. Thus, TGO layer rapidly grows resulting in stress formation at the interface. There is a little difference in porosity values of top coats according to . It is absolutely effective in oxidation rate. However, the use of top coatings with different crystal structures is a dominant factor in the oxidation rate. In terms of oxidation mechanism, Gd2Zr2O7 have higher resistance against oxygen penetration due to having stable Frenkel pairs in its structure when compared with YSZ . This can be attributed to the fact that, Gd2Zr2O7 includes an oxygen vacancy at 48f position and oxygen anion at interstitial 8b position in its crystal structure. These two oxygen anions provide stable Frenkel pair defects, that require higher activation energy for oxygen transfer, thus a better oxidation resistance is exhibited by Gd2Zr2O7 when compared to YSZ . Mahade et al.  compared the oxidation behavior of YSZ and YSZ/Gd2Zr2O7 in terms of TGO thickness. The results show that double layer system with Gd2Zr2O7 has more resistance against oxidation. The reason of better resistance is ascribed to the presence of stable Frenkel pair defects in Gd2Zr2O7. Its oxygen permeability is lower than YSZ.	0
During oxidation, initially Y is oxidized since it has the highest affinity. Afterwards it forms Yttrium Aluminum Garnet (YAG) phases after its reaction with the TGO layer formed by Al2O3. Its effect was discussed in the literature . It was explained in the previous studies that GdAlO3 phases occur at the interface as a result of the reaction between Al2O3 and Gd2Zr2O7 under high temperature. It was also stated that TBC's lifetime is reduced due to the porosity formation induced by GD's diffusion into the interface . In the present study it was hard to make an accurate distinction with the SEM and mapping images taken with higher magnification after the 100h oxidation test (.). Also, Gd, Al and O2 coexist in only few regions and YAG phases are comparatively more detectable as seen in . TBC/TGO interface was also found to involve mixed oxides.	0
Crystallographic transformation may affect the oxidation behavior at the interface of the bond coat and the top coat. Because, this transformation may cause volumetric change, thus leading to formation of higher stresses at the interface in addition to the stresses of newly formed oxides due to oxidation. All these effects increase the bond coat(BC)/top coat (TC) mismatch. In addition, after phase transformation, potential crack formations can lead to oxygen ingress to the BC/TC interface. The X-ray diffraction patterns of as-sprayed and 100h oxidized TBCs are given in . YSZ has tetragonal phase (t) while Gd2Zr2O7 has cubic phase (c) during all oxidation periods. Metastable tetragonal (t) phase does not transform into monoclinic or cubic phase until 1200°C . In contrast to YSZ, Gd2Zr2O7 preserves its phase stability up to 1550°C . As a result, XRD peaks show that there is no phase transformation during oxidation for each TBCs.	0
TGO layer thickness for YSZ-TBC is higher than that of Gd2Zr2O7-TBC as shown in . After 50h oxidation period, the growth rate of the TGO layer decreased compared to 8 and 24h oxidation. However, mixed oxide formation for YSZ-TBC is lower compared to Gd2Zr2O7-TBC. Also, the crack formation is observed more clearly in Gd2Zr2O7-TBC as a result of its elastic modulus.	0
Low elastic modulus and toughness can cause early crack formation which provides simpler oxygen penetration to structure . In fact, SEM examination and TGO thickness show that Gd2Zr2O7 has better oxidation resistance but crack formation can lead to more dangerous oxidation related results. Thus, mixed oxide formation and internal oxidation content can be seen at higher rates in Gd2Zr2O7-TBC which exhibits higher rates of crack formation as seen in .	0
Another important factor for crack formation is thermal expansion coefficient of the coatings. YSZ has a slightly higher thermal expansion coefficient compared to Gd2Zr2O7. Depending on increased oxidation time, thermal expansion mismatch increases even more and ceramic layer is exposed to higher stresses. In the first stages of 8 and 24h oxidation periods, Gd2Zr2O7-TBCs exhibited lower TGO growth as mixed oxide formation was not visible. This is attributed to the fact that the stress level has not yet reached a level to form cracks in the coating. However, as the stress level increases with increasing time, crack formations will result in expedited oxidation, hence formations of mixed oxides. Despite all these disadvantages, TGO layer thickness in Gd2Zr2O7-TBC was observed at slightly lower rates according to TGO thickness measurements. Better strain tolerance gained by EB-PVD positively contributed to the oxidation performance of Gd2Zr2O7-TBC. Vaßen et al.  used APS coating technique to deposit Gd2Zr2O7 and YSZ on NiCoCrAlY bond coated Inconel 738 to compare their thermal cycling performance with YSZ. Results showed that YSZ-TBC exhibited longer lifetime due to its higher fracture toughness and CTE. To overcome thermal expansion mismatch, double ceramic layered TBCs (Gd2Zr2O7/YSZ) were used. Similar to this study, Bobzin et al.  performed oxidation test on Gd2Zr2O7 and YSZ TBCs at 1300°C with 25h. YSZ TBC prevented its uniformity whereas Gd2Zr2O7 spalled in spite of usage of EB-PVD technique. However, double ceramic layered TBCs (Gd2Zr2O7/YSZ) exhibited better stability. In contrast to these studies, Munawar et al.  compared thermal cycling performance of YSZ and Gd2Zr2O7 TBCs produced by EB-PVD technique but their results did not support each other due to different top coat deposition techniques. Gd2Zr2O7 TBC exhibited better performance through EB-PVD process providing higher lateral compliance. In the literature, some studies focused on the use of double ceramic layer to overcome the thermal expansion mismatch between the bond and top coat for single layered Gd2Zr2O7 TBCs and to minimize the low fracture toughness of Gd2Zr2O7.	0
In this study, homogenously produced CoNiCrAlY bond coats with low porosity content, deposited with CGDS technique, were combined with EB-PVD technique which provides higher expansion tolerance; and oxidation behavior of TBC systems including Gd2Zr2O7 as a new top coating material and YSZ as the conventional top coating material, was investigated. In the first stages of oxidation, the growth behavior of TGO layer occurred at an increased level compared to other stages of growth behavior of TGO. TGO thickness increased with increasing time and formations of mixed oxides were observed. At the end of the oxidation tests, no spallation was observed at the coating interfaces of both TBC systems having YSZ and Gd2Zr2O7 as top coat material, and the TGO layer maintained its integrity. In terms of the growth behavior of TGO layer, better results were obtained from the TBC system with Gd2Zr2O7 top coat. Its lower coefficient of thermal conductivity, lower oxygen permeability, relatively high coefficient of thermal expansion and structural stability at higher temperatures render the Gd2Zr2O7 a good alternative top coating material for the TBCs. On the other hand its lower fracture toughness and relatively lower coefficient of thermal expansion compared to YSZ, result in early formation of cracks during the thermal stresses occurring at sustained high temperatures. In this regard, the forthcoming studies will focus on the modifications for improved Gd2Zr2O7 toughness, new material dopants and/or double or gradient layered coatings.	0
This investigation was financially supported by The  (TUBITAK, ).	0
Polycrystalline Ni-based superalloys are used in aeroengines and land-based gas turbines for components such as turbine discs. These are exposed to oxidizing conditions and stress at operating temperatures in the range 500–700°C and, clearly, the role of oxidation on crack propagation rates is an important aspect. It has been recognized for some time  that oxide intrusions could exist ahead of a crack tip but it is only recently  that these have been examined at sufficient spatial resolution that their nature and morphology could be reasonably established. This recent work  was performed on RR1000, a current-generation, high-strength turbine disc alloy of nominal composition (wt.%): 15Cr, 18Co, 3.0Al, 3.5Ti, 5.0Mo, 2.0Ta, 0.5Hf, balance Ni. In this recent work, focused ion beam (FIB) sections through the (intergranular) oxide intrusions were examined using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) coupled with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) analysis. The oxides across the intrusion width tended to be layered according to their thermodynamic stability which meant that the central region of the intrusion can be occupied by the less-stable (Ni,Co) oxides, whereas underlying this was a layer of chromia and/or alumina , but there was uncertainty over the distribution of Ti which may have been associated with either the chromia or alumina layers. It is important to understand the distribution of Ti since it can exist in Cr2O3 in solution up to concentrations of 18at.% at 1000°C  and affects Cr transport rates . Similarly, protective oxide layers of chromia or alumina determine oxygen potentials within the intrusion  and its rate of growth . The purpose of the present work was to obtain further insight into the element distribution within an oxide intrusion ahead of a crack, in a similar RR1000 specimen to that tested previously , using atom probe tomography (APT). Pulsed laser APT was used and this could provide 3-D atomic-scale resolution of site-specific features .	1
The microstructure of RR1000 examined in this study was identical to the study in Ref. . The material was machined to corner crack test pieces having a square nett section of 4.5×4.5mm2. These were first subjected to tensile cyclic loading at 650°C in air in order to initiate crack growth from a notch (∼0.3mm). The crack was then exposed at the same temperature in air for ∼3h without applied load, i.e., a stress intensity factor Ki≈0, as defined in Ref. , so that no crack growth occurred during this hold period. A Zeiss NVision 40 dual-beam FIB was used for the APT specimen preparation. The extracted specimens were analyzed in a CAMECA LEAP-3000HR instrument at 60K with a pulse energy of ∼0.6–0.7nJ and a repetition rate of 200kHz. It is reported by other authors that the oxides can be field-evaporated preferentially to the metal matrix  or vice versa , which can cause ion trajectory aberrations known as local magnification effects . To mitigate such effects, the oxide–metal interface was aligned as closely as possible normal to the direction of ion evaporation. It is also known that oxygen has a tendency to field-evaporate as molecular-ion species . This can cause peak overlaps in the resulting APT mass spectrum which, in certain instances, make it difficult to resolve the identity of an ion unambiguously. Hence, each mass spectrum peak was carefully examined by a recently developed decomposition method based upon inspection of neighbouring peaks caused by isotopes and knowledge of their theoretical natural abundance . The method enables more rigid quantifications for the species detected as molecular ions, i.e. oxygen. The method has an uncertainty of several per cent for the total counts of oxygen ions . Hence, it was taken as an error as well as its counting statistical error and shown in one of the data points in each figure. With regard to each metallic species, the error agrees with counting statistics and an error bar is shown for one of the metallic species.	1
a and b show scanning electron microscopy (SEM) in-lens detector images of different stages in the preparation of the APT specimen, which was welded with tungsten (W) to a specimen stage, which is not included in the image. a shows a grain boundary with an oxide intrusion. The crack propagation direction is indicated by the white curly arrow. The tip of the oxide intrusion is located beyond the area shown in a, ∼10μm towards the curly arrow. The crack tip, which is defined as the furthest extent of material separation , is located several microns beyond the image towards the opposite direction of the arrow. In this study, an oxide morphology similar to the previous results, cf. Fig. 8 in Ref. , was deliberately chosen to compare results between the APT and EDX methods. Although the stress intensity factors used in the two oxides are different, the distributions of the oxygen partial pressure across the two oxide intrusions, which is an important parameter to study oxide morphologies, are considered to be comparable with each other by observing the size of the (Ni, Co)O in the centre of the oxide intrusion (see b). b shows the prepared needle-shaped sample prior to the APT measurement. Analysis of the entire specimen was attempted but the (Ni,Co)O region in the central region of the intrusion fractured during the data acquisition. Only the region indicated by the trapezoidal-shaped box was analyzed successfully; however, this contains the more stable (Cr, Ti, Al) oxides of interest.	0
c shows the 3-D reconstructed specimen in which the oxide, ∼70nm thick, is the upper part of the image and the unoxidized alloy (substrate), identified by the green particles, Ni atoms, forms the lower part. Cylindrically shaped regions of interest (ROIs) were defined in order to examine the elemental concentrations across the oxide–metal interface. The diameter of the ROI was ∼20nm and this was divided lengthwise into 1.5nm intervals. Two representative results are shown in d and e, where, for the sake of clarity, only the key elements are shown. In d, the chemistry profile starts from the top of the specimen. Very little Ni and Co was found in the oxide and the concentration of Al and Ti decreased towards the oxide–metal interface which is indicated by the broken line at 60nm. The oxide formed in this scanned region is dominated by Cr and has a measured composition near the oxide–metal interface of (Cr90Al05Ti05)2O3. The incorporation of Al and Ti  into chromia is not surprising since substantial solubility is possible. No evidence of an underlying alumina layer was found in this scan. e shows another example of a chemistry profile taken through the same sample. Ni and Co are again essentially absent but the Cr content gradually decreases from over 30at.% to <10at.% at the oxide–metal interface (located at 70nm). The Al concentration in this scan clearly increases (to >20at.%) at the interface and indicates a layer of ∼5nm thickness. These element distributions were also confirmed in the previous investigation  but the improved spatial resolution of the APT technique demonstrates how thin (∼5nm) the interfacial alumina layer is. Additionally, in the scan of e, there is a region at ∼53nm where the Ti concentration increases at the expense of Cr and Al. The apparent composition of this feature, as taken from these traces, suggests a phase of the type Cr2Tin-2O2n-1 may be present. Work by Naoumidis et al.  has reported these in bulk samples from the Cr2O3–TiO2 system, albeit at the higher temperature of 1000°C.	0
Using a different data set, a more detailed compositional information of the Ti-rich feature mentioned above is shown in , which is an APT reconstruction of a specimen in which the crack is running through the middle of the specimen and the propagation direction is as indicated by the black arrow in a. A tip of the oxide intrusion exists a few microns away from the APT specimen on the right-hand side. The pink isoconcentration surface (isosurface) profile, which delineates the region that the total concentration of Cr and oxygen is >75at.%, is Cr-based, leading to the conclusion that it is M2O3 type; the determination of the metal to oxygen stoichiometry is supported by the analyses of the previous study . The dark green isosurface with the total Ti and oxygen concentration of >80at.% highlights a Ti-based oxide. Chemical concentration profiles across the two oxides are shown in b and demonstrate the transition from the Cr-based to the Ti-based oxide. (Ni, Co)O was not observed in this specimen, which suggests that the oxygen partial pressure in this region is in the region of ∼10−30 or below . This is also an indication that the region is close to the tip of the oxide intrusion . The cylindrical ROI and the direction of the concentration profile are illustrated in c in the background, which is the identical isosurface profile as a but as seen from the APT detector. The concentration profile of c shows a profile identical to that of b, but with increased oxygen content, which changes from M2O3 (55at.%) to Ti oxide (60at.%). These concentrations are smaller than expected for the stoichiometric ratios for Cr2O3 and TiO2, respectively, but this discrepancy can be explained by the loss in detection of oxygen ions during the APT experiment. In this study, >45% of detected events were in the form of multiple hits. This has previously been reported to lead to an underestimation of the amount of oxygen, where oxygen in a pure bulk Al2O3 was determined as 56.5at.% . It is concluded in this study that the measured oxygen concentration in M2O3 is observed to be lower than the stoichiometric ratio by 10%. TiO2 was identified in the previous study by TEM diffraction analysis  which is comparable in morphology to the Ti oxide found in this study, as shown in the far right in c. It is concluded that the Ti-based oxide found in this study is TiO2.	0
a shows the same APT reconstruction as c, but with isosurfaces for total Ti and oxygen concentrations ⩾80at.%. The isosurfaces are all defined by the same chemical limits but the orange isosurface is a region within 20nm of the oxide–metal interface. b shows the view as would be seen from the APT detector. In the background of c, the largest Ti-based oxide has been isolated and is highlighted with an isosurface. A corresponding proximity histogram analysis has then been undertaken to calculate the chemical concentration profile as a function of distance normal to the interface delineating the Ti-based oxide and the surrounding oxide (M2O3 type). The position of this interface is defined by the isosurface. Similarly d shows another proximity histogram for a second Ti-based oxide, the position of which is less than a few nanometers from the oxide–metal interface as indicated in the background. Oxygen clearly increases up to 60at.% and Ti dominates the metallic elements in the oxide. The volume fraction and size of these particles become greater beyond ∼50nm from the oxide–metal interface but are fewer and smaller at closer (⩽20nm) distances. A detailed analysis of the Ti-rich oxide phases, based on 25 different particles, gives their composition as (at.%) 59.99 (2.63) O, 29.27 (3.02) Ti, 4.66 (1.65) Cr where the bracketed values are one standard deviation. No other elements were present in statistically significant quantities. The ratio of O:(Ti+Cr) concentrations is ∼1.8 and again supports the view that the Ti-rich phase is essentially TiO2 once it is recognized, as discussed above.	0
The APT technique has shown that a thin alumina layer (∼5nm) can be detected between chromia and the RR1000 alloy in an oxide intrusion formed ahead of a crack during a dwell period in air of 3h at 650°C. This layer is not always present, however, and chromia then forms in direct contact with the alloy. In each case, the chromia layer contains a dispersion of fine (<10nm) TiO2 particles, and this seems to be the first direct observation of such particles. Their origin remains unclear but one possibility is that the Ti solubility within the chromia layer has been exceeded and discrete particles of TiO2 precipitate.	0
H.S.K. greatly appreciates the invaluable advice from Dr. Atsushi Sato, research fellow at the Department of Materials, University of Oxford. This research is supported by the Seventh Framework Programme, project reference No. 229108. The authors acknowledge support from the UK Engineering and Physical Science Research Council (EPSRC) and Rolls-Royce plc.	0
Single crystal (SX) superalloys have been widely used in advanced turbine engines for hot components. To further enhance their high temperature capability, the level of refractory elements such as tungsten and rhenium in the advanced SX superalloys has been gradually increased. However, there is a great tendency for the formation of grain defects (strays, low angle grain boundaries, freckles, etc.) in these alloys . Therefore, trace elements such as carbon and boron are reintroduced into SX superalloys for grain boundary reinforcement  and reducing casting defects during solidification .	0
The formation of grain defects in the SX superalloys with the addition of carbon can be effectively suppressed . However, conflicting results involving the role of carbon on the creep property of SX alloy have been reported. It has been found that the creep life in the carbon modified SX alloy at 850°C/430MPa is improved, but the creep life at 1050°C/165MPa decreases . Contrary results were observed by Liu et.al . Kong and Wasson also reported that carbon has a detrimental effect on creep life under different conditions . It is necessary to clarify the influence of carbon on the creep life in SX superalloys.	0
Creep rupture is associated with a number of microstructural features, including MC carbides, porosity and TCP formation. It has been confirmed that morphology of MC carbides transforms from blocky to script-like and the volume fraction of γ/γ′ eutectic is reduced by carbon additions . However, there are controversial opinions concerning the role of carbon during the formation of porosity. Liu and Chen  found that the formation of porosity is suppressed by the addition of carbon due to volume expansion of MC carbides. However, an increase volume fraction of porosity is observed by Al-Jarba and Culter  with carbon additions. Moreover, the H-pore formed during homogenization has been observed, and the volume fraction of H-pore exhibits the same level as that of S-pore formed during solidification . The two kinds of pores have not been distinguished. In this study, the three dimensional information of S-pore and H-pore has been investigated by X-ray computed tomography (XCT).	0
The topologically close packed (TCP) phase is prone to form during the rafting creep . The brittle and needle-like phase depletes strengthening elements from the matrix and is susceptible to crack during creep deformation. Retardation of TCP formation in carbon modified alloy RR2072 has been observed , while Qin and Kong  reported that TCP phase initiates in the vicinity of MC carbides.	0
Therefore, the aim of the present study is to illustrate the effect of carbon on the microstructure involving the porosity, the TCP phase and the creep properties in the SX alloys.	0
A 3rd generation nickel-base single crystal (SX) superalloy DD33 with 4% Re (mass fraction, %) was used in the present experiment. The master alloys with three different amounts of carbon were directionally solidified (DS) into ϕ16×200mm SX bars by the high rate solidification (HRS) process. The actual carbon contents of alloys were given in .	1
Longitudinal orientation of all SX bars was within 10° deviating from [001] orientation. The samples for comparison of as-cast microstructures (γ/γ′ eutectic, porosity and MC carbides) were sectioned perpendicularly to the DS direction and taken from the same location on each SX bar in order to minimize the effect of solidification conditions. To investigate 3-D features of solidification pores (S-pore) and homogenization pores (H-pore) by XCT, the as-cast and solution heat treated samples were machined into cubes of 1×1×1mm3.	1
Partitioning coefficient of alloying elements in alloys with different carbon contents was measured by electron probe microanalyzer (EPMA). Point scans in dendrite cores and interdendritic regions were performed. The partitioning coefficient, ki, of each element was identified by dividing the weight percent of each element at the dendrite cores by that in the interdendritic regions. Ten points from each area were averaged to reduce variation.	1
Following the same heat treatment (1335°C/10h, AC+1150°C/4h, AC+870°C/24h, AC), the first group of samples were exposed at 1100°C for 1000h to examine the formation of TCP phase. The second group of heat treated samples were machined into creep specimens with gauge diameter of 5mm and gauge length of 25mm along the [001] orientation. Creep tests were carried out at 870°C/586MPa and 1120°C/140MPa, using FC-20 high temperature creep-testing machines. The microstructure of crept specimens was examined using scanning electron microscope (SEM).	1
Varying the carbon contents from 88 to 430ppm, the alloys have similar dendrite arm spacing, but the morphology of MC carbides changes from blocky (a) to script-like (b). These results agree well with previous studies . Further SEM observations on the deep-etched sample show that the script-like MC carbides actually adopt a dendritic structure (c). These dendritic carbides are rich in Ta and Ti, and have a small amount of Mo, Co and Cr ().	0
The volume fraction of porosity measured by XCT and OM is given in . The volume fraction of S-pore measured by XCT is 0.07%, 0.08% and 0.12% in the alloys of SX-1, SX-2 and SX-3, respectively. The XCT results are higher, compared with the porosity metallographically measured by OM. The porosity measured by the two different methods are in agreement within the accuracy. Increasing volume fractions of porosity is observed in high carbon modified alloys. Distribution of porosity diameter is illustrated in . The maximum diameter of porosity increases from 30 to 46μm, with the carbon content increasing from 88 to 430ppm.	0
 shows SEM and XCT images of the porosity in the alloy SX-1. SEM observation indicates that porosities are located in the interdendritic regions (a). XCT observation shows that there are two kinds of pores: the sphere pores and the irregular pores (b).	0
Partitioning coefficient of alloying elements in as-cast alloys with different carbon contents is shown in . It can be seen that the addition of carbon decreases the segregation of Re and W, while it has a little influence on the segregation of elements such as Al and Ta. The results are identical to the findings of Tin et al. .	0
 presents that the volume fraction of porosity increases in the experimental alloys after solution heat treatment. The increment of porosity after solution heat treatment was 0.04%, 0.06% and 0.04%, which are named as volume fractions of H-pores. As shown in , the probability of small sphere-shaped pores increases after solution heat treatment. Morphology of porosity in the alloy SX-1 after solution heat treatment at 1335°C for 10h is illustrated in . Small sphere-shaped pores form and S-pores grow round.	0
The formation of TCP phase during high temperature exposure at 1100°C for 1000h varies significantly in the alloys with different carbon contents. TCP precipitates are occasionally observed in the alloys with 88 and 220ppm carbon as given in a and b. In the alloy with 430ppm carbon, no TCP phase is observed (c). These TCP precipitates are rich in W, Re, Cr, and Co as listed in . Based on the chemical compositions and morphologies, these TCP precipitates are confirmed to be μ phase. Decomposition of MC carbides is not observed in the experimental alloys after long term exposure (c).	0
 gives the curves of time vs. creep strain for the experimental alloys at 850°C and 586MPa. a shows all curves consist of three stages. Significant primary creep strain develops in all alloys and the onset of primary creep occurs in a different manner as indicated in b. The specimens with 430ppm carbon show the largest primary creep strain with the shortest rupture life of 276h. The specimens containing 88 and 220ppm carbon have shorter primary creep strain and longer creep life of 421 and 364h, respectively.	0
SEM images of the longitudinal section of the ruptured specimen reveal that cracks are normal to the applied stress direction, as shown in . In all the specimens, cracks preferentially initiate at MC carbides in the interdendritic regions. Cracks in the dendritic regions are not observed. Number of microcracks in the alloy with 430ppm carbon is larger than that in the alloy with 88ppm carbon.	0
 shows the creep curves of three alloys tested at 1120°C/140MPa. The curves are very similar (a). b presents the plots of creep time vs. creep strain rate. The creep rates stay relatively constant for the first 60h and increase more rapidly for alloys with 88ppm carbon. The high carbon-containing specimens show the smallest elongation of 14% as well as the longest rupture life of 91h, while the specimens with 88 and 220ppm carbon have the similar elongation of around 50% and creep life of 61 and 75h, respectively.	0
 shows SEM images of longitudinal sections, confirming the microcracks grow perpendicularly to the applied stress direction. Microcracks in both dendritic and interdendritic regions are observed in the experimental alloys with 88 and 220ppm carbon, as indicated in a and b. Only creep cavities in the dendritic regions in the alloys with 430ppm carbon are observed in c. d, e and f gives the microcracks or creep cavities originated from TCP phases in the dendritic areas, while h, i and j presents the microcracks in the interdendritic area originated from MC carbides.	0
According to Niyama criterion ,where ΔP is pressure drop across the mushy zone, η is the viscosity of the liquid, fL is the volume fraction of liquid, K is the permeability of the liquid, G is temperature gradient and V is cooling velocity, ΔT is temperature difference across the mushy zone, α is a constant parameter. The total solidification shrinkage is defined as β=(ρS−ρL)/ρL, where ρL and ρS is the density of liquid and solid, respectively. The permeability of the liquid K proposed by Carlson and Madison  is defined as follows:where initial permeability of the liquid K0 is proportional to equivalent diameter of the interdendritic regions. Integrating Eq.  substituted by expression , pressure drop across the mushy zone is written as follows:	0
ΔP=ηβΔTK0(G/V)−2∫1fL(1−fLfL)2dfL=ΔP0(fL−1fL−2lnfL)	0
Porosity is prone to form when the pressure drop of molten alloy becomes larger or the remaining liquid is not enough to compensate the volume shrinkage during the last stage of solidification. The pressure drop of liquid is inversely proportional to the permeability of the liquid, K0.	0
Considering similar solidification parameters of three SX alloys, with the carbon content increasing from 88 to 430ppm, the morphology of MC carbides evolves from blocky to dendritic-like (). The equivalent diameter of the interdendritic regions is decreased by these well-developed dendritic carbides. Therefore, the pressure drop increases with the reduction of the initial permeability of the liquid (K0) in the alloy with 430ppm carbon (Eq. ). Although small pores may disappear due to the lattice expansion of MC carbides , the larger size of dendritic carbides is obviously an important reason for the high level of porosity in the alloy with 430ppm carbon.	0
It was found that the imbalance cross-diffusion of alloy elements between Al, Ta and Re, resulted in the Kirkendall pore, which may be the reason for the H-pore formation during solution heat treatment . In the present study, although the carbon content is different, the primary chemical composition of SX alloys is identical. Thus, the level of imbalanced cross-diffusion of alloy elements during the same solution heat treatment is similar.	0
TCP phases are prone to form during long term exposure or creep deformation because of the segregation of alloying elements, which is generally undesirable in SX superalloys . The reduction of segregation of alloying elements with the increase of the carbon content gives the reason why the TCP phase formation in alloys with 430ppm is suppressed (). On the other hand, creep deformation accelerates diffusion and thus promotes the formation of TCP during high temperature creep (f).	0
Most work has revealed that creep performance at low temperature and high stress is sensitive to the primary creep strain, and the primary creep behavior is controlled by shearing of γ′ phase . Therefore, the high carbon content alloy crept at 850°C/586MPa with the largest primary creep strains exhibits the shortest creep life, as shown in . It was reported that the formation of nano-size M23C6 carbides may prevent the dislocation movement and enhance the creep properties , but these nano-size M23C6 carbides were not observed in the experimental alloys. On the contrary, MC carbides act as stress concentration sites and induce premature microcracks during the low temperature creep deformation (c). Hence, the larger size of dendritic carbides in the interdendritic regions in the alloys with 430ppm carbon may accelerate the local creep damage and have a detrimental effect on the creep behavior at 850°C and 586MPa .	0
Although microcracks induced by the dendritic carbides and porosity in the interdendritic regions were observed (), TCP phases near the fracture surfaces were observed in all the crept specimens at 1120°C/140MPa (), which would be expected to have the greatest impact on the high temperature creep behavior . Usually, the precipitation of μ particles will lead to the depletion of strengthening elements from the matrix. The softened matrix was prone to deform, which in turn accelerates the formation of μ particles . In addition, needle shaped μ phase was reported to induce creep cavities and microcracks in the dendritic regions, which accelerates creep rupture . Therefore, suppression of TCP phase during 1120°C/140MPa creep is a main reason for the longer creep life in the alloy with 430ppm carbon. On the other hand, less microcracks in the interdendritic regions in the alloy with 220 and 430ppm carbon are observed (a–c), which indicates less impact of dendritic carbides in the interdendritic regions on the creep life at 1120°C/140MPa in the alloy.	0
Effect of carbon content on the microstructure and creep properties of a 3rd generation single crystal nickel-base superalloy has been investigated. The following conclusions can be given:	0
With the increase of carbon content from 88 to 430ppm, MC carbides evolve from blocky to script-like. The dendritic carbides promote the formation of S-pore due to the increase of the pressure drop. The volume fraction of porosity increases in the experimental alloys after solution heat treatment. The level of H-pores in SX alloys with various carbon contents is identical.	0
The high carbon content alloy crept at 850°C/586MPa exhibits the shortest creep life with the largest primary creep strain. The dendritic carbides and pores are detrimental to the creep rupture behavior.	0
The TCP phase is expected to have significant impact on the creep behavior at 1120°C/140MPa. Formation of the TCP phase during high temperature exposure is suppressed by the addition of carbon, which results in the longer high temperature creep life in the alloy with 430ppm carbon.	0
This work was supported by the  (51201164) and the  (2012AA03A511).	0
External chromia thickness was unaffected by stress.	0
Tensile stress resulted in increase of alumina penetration by factor of 2.	0
This is taken to be evidence of Stress Aided Grain Boundary Oxidation (SAGBO).	0
Tensile stress at the tip of the intrusion increases the anion vacancy concentration.	0
Leads to flux of oxygen vacancies along intrusion, increasing the growth rate.	0
It is now well recognised that stress, whether applied, thermal or induced by oxide growth, can affect the oxidation of metals and alloys []. Studies to date have tended to focus on the behaviour of surface oxide layers and have supported the expectation [] that tensile stress may induce oxide cracking whereas compressive stress may initiate oxide spallation either through a buckling or wedging process. In either case, the damage to the surface oxide, which provided protection, results in an increase in the rate of oxidation [,].	0
For those oxides, e.g. ZrO2 or Al2O3 that form new oxide at the base of the surface layer, significant compressive growth stress have been measured within the oxide layer [] reaching values as high as ˜1 GPa. It has been suggested [] that such values are sufficiently high to have a measurable influence on the thermodynamics of anion vacancy formation at the oxide/metal interface and could explain the sub-parabolic growth kinetics of ZrO2 on Zircaloy. The concept has also been applied by Limarga and Wilkinson [,] to the nitridation of TiAl exposed to 4-point bending. They confirmed that tensile stress increased the rate of penetration of the nitride front whereas compressive stress reduced it. Their results were well described by an expression of the form of Eq. , which derives from the earlier theoretical treatment [,]:Here, y is the thickness of the nitride layer, dy/dt the rate of thickening of the layer, Di is the diffusion coefficient, ΔΩ is the volume change increase (positive) on converting TiAl to TiN, σH is the local hydrostatic stress (positive when tensile), k is Boltzmann’s constant and T is absolute temperature. A similar formulation has been used in other modelling studies of mechanical/oxidation interactions on the growth of the surface oxide layer [].	0
High temperature alloys have compositions that are intended to form a protective oxide layer, usually chromia or alumina. Important classes of such alloys are chromia-forming stainless steels and Ni-based superalloys. However, these alloys also contain elements, in particular Al, Ti and Si, which form oxides that are more thermodynamically stable than chromia. As a result, internal oxidation of these elements can form and often does so as intergranular intrusions of silica in the stainless steels [] or of alumina in the chromia-forming Ni-based superalloys []. This is a significant form of environmental degradation because fatigue cracks are known [] to nucleate at alumina intrusions in the RR1000 superalloy used for aero-engine turbine discs. It is important to know whether the growth rate of such intrusions can be affected by imposed stress, i.e. whether Stress Aided Grain Boundary Oxidation (SAGBO) can occur.	0
The earliest mention of SAGBO has been traced back to 1980 [], but it is possible it was first proposed some years before. Since then, it has proven elusive to demonstrate experimentally that the phenomenon occurs. The focus has been on crack propagation, typically under fatigue conditions, in an oxidising environment at high temperatures where accelerated crack growth occurs []. The term “SAGBO” has been used occasionally to describe this process [,] but two distinctly different mechanisms have been postulated. Under the category of dynamic embrittlement, stress-aided diffusion of elemental oxygen is envisaged to occur along the alloy grain boundary ahead of the crack tip. Its presence there is thought to reduce the cohesive strength of the grain boundary and, in so doing, produce conditions for an increased rate of crack propagation. Whereas long-range intergranular diffusion of elemental oxygen is known to occur [] in Ni under test conditions in which internal oxidation only of carbon was possible, it is implausible in typical commercial alloys []. Such alloys contain elements with high affinity for oxygen (e.g. Cr, Al, Ti, Si) and these can be expected to getter elemental oxygen at the crack tip to form oxide phases. Intergranular oxidation ahead of fatigue cracks in Udimet 500 was reported decades ago by McMahon [] but was attributed to long-range diffusion of oxygen and oxidation of Cr-rich carbide precipitates, i.e. a variant of dynamic embrittlement. Recent TEM studies on alloy 718 [,], Udimet 720Li [], and RR1000 [,], indicate that intergranular oxidation emanates from the crack tip to form an intergranular oxide intrusion which contains oxide layers of Co, Ni, Cr, Ti and Al arranged in the order of their thermodynamic stability. In addition, atom probe tomography [,] and nanoSIMS [,,] studies failed to detect elemental oxygen ahead of these oxide intrusions, consistent with their high thermodynamic stability. These recent observations provide persuasive evidence that the damaging effect of an oxidising environment arises from the fracture of these brittle oxides which will lead to enhanced crack growth. SAGBO, however, would also require the intrusion growth rate along the grain boundary to be increased by tensile stress, a detail seldom reported since the term was coined [].	0
In recent TEM observations [], it was suspected that an enhanced rate of growth of the oxide intrusion ahead of a fatigue crack in the Ni-based superalloy RR1000 had indeed taken place. A new SAGBO model was suggested [] to account for these observations based on the principle that the anticipated tensile stress at the tip of the intrusion would increase the anion vacancy flux to the crack tip and, hence, the growth rate of the intrusion. The underlying concept is the same as that suggested previously [] to account for sub-parabolic zirconia growth. Using the equivalent of Eq. , the estimated enhancement factors for the oxide intrusions in RR1000 were found [] to be commensurate with the presence of an intrusion tip stress of around 1 GPa which was considered not unreasonable for the alloy. Whereas these initial results were encouraging, it is recognised that they derive from complex circumstances, in which cracks and multiple oxide types were present, and need to be treated with some caution.	0
The purpose of the present work was to explore the SAGBO concept further but using a simpler experimental arrangement in which a single oxide is examined in the absence of a crack. The Ni-based RR1000 alloy was again used because such high-strength alloys can sustain the high intrusion stresses (˜1 GPa) thought to be needed to produce measurable changes in oxidation behaviour. In common with other chromia-forming superalloys [], intergranular intrusions of alumina develop [] beneath the surface oxide and it is the growth of these that is considered in the present work.	0
The nominal composition of the RR1000 alloy used in this study is given in . The alloy, produced by powder metallurgy, was supplied by Rolls-Royce as machined and shot-peened specimens of double-edge notched (DEN) configuration, as shown in . The average grain size was ˜40 μm.	1
These specimens were subjected to fatigue loading at 750 °C in air under a conventional R = 0 trapezoidal 1-1-1-1 waveform, i.e. 1 s from zero to maximum tensile stress, a hold at the maximum for 1 s, followed by a reduction to zero in 1 s and a hold there for 1 s, and the sequence is repeated. In the present tests, each 4-second cycle was applied ˜100,000 times, i.e. equivalent to a test time of ˜111 h. The maximum applied stress in these cycles was designed to produce an estimated tensile peak stress at the base of the notches of 900 MPa. Fatigue testing under these conditions did not result in specimen failure nor crack development nor oxide cracking.	1
After testing, the mid-section of the sample, containing the notches, was sectioned, sputtered with gold and plated with nickel. It was then mounted in a conductive Bakelite resin and ground using progressively finer grades of wet SiC papers before being polished with progressively finer diamond solutions. The final polish was performed using OP-S colloidal silica solution.	1
Examination was performed on the cross sections using a Jeol 7000 F Field Emission Gun (FEG) Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM), fitted with Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) used with an acceleration voltage of 20 kV. Images were taken at three different locations, denoted A, B, C on each notch of the samples as shown in . Location B experiences the highest value of axial applied stress (900 MPa) whereas at locations A and C, the applied stress, both axial and tangential, will approximate to zero because of the proximity of the free surfaces. This has been confirmed by finite element analysis (L. Kovacs, Rolls-Royce, unpublished work).	0
At least four sets of five measurements of the external chromia thickness and internal oxide penetration depths were taken from each location over a length of ˜80 μm using backscattered electron (BSE) images and Image J 1.48 analysis software. Approximately 120 μm was then removed from the cross section thickness by further polishing to expose a further set of grains for which the surface oxide thickness and intergranular penetration depths were measured. This procedure yielded a total of 40–50 measurements per location for each notch.	1
Consistent with previous work [], the surface oxide consisted of a titanium-enriched chromia layer, with an outer layer of discontinuous rutile, together with internally growing alumina intrusions within the alloy matrix,  and . The internal intrusions are described as intergranular, because formation predominantly occurs at the grain boundaries of small recrystallized grains with a diameter of approximately 1–3 μm, , also described in []. In , two images from the same section are included with different contrast settings, used here to emphasise the presence of recrystallized grains. This general morphology was present at the locations (B) experiencing the maximum applied stress and at those (A, C) with negligible applied stress. A set of EDS point scans down one of these intrusions is shown in , together with results for each point in . The results from points 3 and 4 are expected to be an underestimate of the aluminium content of the intrusion as, due to the size of the interaction volume of the electron beam (having a diameter of 1 μm and an estimated depth of no more than 1.1 μm), X-rays from the intrusion and the surrounding depleted alloy will contribute to the signal. Therefore, the results indicate the intrusions are alumina.	0
The chromia layer thicknesses measured for each of the sampling locations are shown as the cumulative probability plots of . A normal distribution has been used to describe the data. (a) gives the results for locations A1, B1 and C1 and (b) those for locations A2, B2 and C2.	0
Clearly, differences exist between the distributions, even at the 95% confidence level. It is thought that these originate from occasional delamination of the Ni plate from the A and C locations during specimen preparation. It is likely that this results in some loss of oxide also and this will lead to smaller measured oxide thickness values at these locations. This is particularly evident for Notch 2 (b) where the measured oxide thickness at Location C is consistently less than at Location A, the other unstressed location. The important feature of the results, however, is that there does not appear to be a significant difference between the mean oxide thickness values in stressed (Location B) and unstressed regions when delamination did not occur.	0
It is difficult to estimate the stress in the external oxide during formation at the stressed location B, as the net stress is complicated by stresses associated with the growth of the oxide. During the unloaded part of the fatigue cycle it is likely that the oxide is in compression. The strain experienced by the oxide, however, will be that imposed by the elastic strain occurring in the test piece. Assuming a stress of 900 MPa at the base of the notch and a Young’s modulus of 150 GPa for this alloy at the test temperature of 750 °C, this equates to a maximum strain of approximately 6 × 10−3. The wave form used in this test dictates that this strain is applied during the 1 s loading ramp, imposing a strain rate of 6 × 10−3 s-1, followed by a 1 s hold before unloading. At this strain rate and temperature, it has been shown that through thickness cracking of chromia formed on flat test specimens occurs under tensile stresses []. At the strain rate imposed in this work, cracking at intervals of ˜25–30 μm would be expected. The sections at the base of the notch under examination were ˜80 μm and thus if this were the case, one to three uniformly spaced cracks would be expected to have formed. This would result in highly localised changes to oxide thickness and impact the internal oxidation of the alloy. However, if the oxide is growing under compression the net tensile stress will be proportionally reduced and thus, although the strain rate is fast enough to crack the surface oxide the maximum strain level is not sufficiently high.	0
It can then be inferred that the growth of the surface oxide layer is not affected significantly by the loading conditions. This indicates that the applied stress has negligible effect on the ionic transport through the oxide layer but this is not unexpected because, unlike the case of zirconia [] or alumina, the dominant diffusing species is the cation. It means that new oxide is formed on the outer surface of the oxide layer where the volume expansion can occur into free space. Of significance, particularly for the present work, is that the measurements show no evidence of cracking or spallation of the surface oxide in the region of maximum applied stress (location B) since this would lead to an enhanced oxide growth rate locally, as described above, but this was not observed. This can be appreciated further from the cross-sections shown in  which also demonstrate the insensitivity of the surface-oxide thickness and morphology to the presence of an applied stress.	0
As can be seen from , intergranular intrusions form underneath the surface oxide layer. These consist of alumina and are a characteristic feature of such chromia-forming superalloys [].  compares, for each notch, the microstructure at the most highly stressed region (Location B) with that at which the applied stress is approximately zero (Location C, for the examples shown). It is striking that the penetration depth at Location B, for both notches, is appreciably greater than at Location C. This difference was quantified in the same way as used for the surface oxide thickness, i.e. cumulative probability plots were produced from approximately 45 measurements for each of the six sampling locations. The penetration quoted is measured from the base of the surface oxide layer to the tip of the alumina intrusion. In this case, the measurements were unaffected by any delamination of the outer regions of the surface oxide during sample preparation.	0
The cumulative probability plots of  show that there are no significant differences in penetration depths at Locations A and C for each of the two notches or between the notches as can be appreciated from the overlapping of the 95% confidence limits. In contrast, the penetration depths in both highly-stressed notch roots (Locations B) are greater than in Locations A and C to a high degree of significance. This difference is clear from . It is also evident from  that the notch penetrations differ significantly between notches with Notch 2 exhibiting larger depths (compare (a) and (b)).	0
The penetration depths for Notch 1, as determined by the 50% cumulative probability values, are 1.19 μm for Location 1 A and a similar value of 1.30 μm for Location 1C. Location 1B, on the other hand, shows a penetration depth of 2.33 μm. The ratio of penetration depths for Location 1B with the average for Locations 1 A and 1C provides an enhancement factor, Sℓ, which will be used as part of the theoretical development later in the paper. The value of Sℓ for Notch 1 is 1.9 and that for Notch 2 is 2.5 based on the cumulative probability plots of . The difference in enhancement factor between the two notches may be due to a difference in the extent of shot peening, applied manually to the test piece, but the situation is unclear at this time. The values are consistent with the images shown in  and it is considered that the observations demonstrate the presence of Stress-Aided Grain Boundary Oxidation (SAGBO) in these tests. The next section of the paper will develop a model for SAGBO and its viability in explaining these deduced enhancement factors will be assessed in the Discussion.	0
The growth of the alumina intrusion requires oxygen to diffuse through the surface layer of chromia and along the intrusion to its tip where new oxide is formed. In each case, transport is expected to be via short-circuit diffusion paths, predominantly grain boundaries, but the rate of growth of the intrusion could, in principle, be determined by diffusion through the chromia layer or along the alumina intrusion. It will be assumed here that the latter is rate determining.	0
Oxygen diffusion is expected to occur by exchange with oxygen vacancies and it is the concentration gradient of these vacancies along the length of the intrusion that determines its rate of growth. Oxygen vacancies are created at the intrusion tip as a consequence of the formation of new alumina and the extension of the intrusion. The process is shown schematically in . The defect structure of alumina is not well established and, for present purposes, the ions and vacancies are assumed to be neutrally charged; this assumption has no significant influence on the development of the model. The reaction that occurs at the tip of the intrusion is:	0
Here O is an oxygen ion on the anion sub-lattice in alumina and V is a corresponding oxygen vacancy. An overall change in volume, ΔΩ, is associated with this reaction:	0
Here, Ω represents the volume of the particular species, A is the first bracketed term and B the second. Although the vacancy volume is unknown, it is expected that ΩB will be much smaller than the volume change, ΩA, produced on formation of the oxide so that the volume change associated with reaction (A) can be approximated as:	0
This volume change is substantial and estimated in the Appendix as a 93% volume expansion. In an isotropic solid, this strain would be distributed uniformly in the three principal directions. In the present case, however, the oxide is being formed along the plane of a grain boundary and it seems intuitively reasonable to assume that the dilatational strain manifests perpendicular to this plane. The expansion results in reactive stresses that are compressive along at least part of the length of the intrusion [] but which become tensile at the intrusion tip. Two possible examples are shown in  which represent different intrusion morphologies in . For a wedge-shaped intrusion ((a)), the compressive stress is largest near the surface oxide layer but diminishes with distance along the intrusion length, becoming tensile towards the tip if continuity across the oxide/metal interface is to be maintained. For the parallel-sided intrusion of (b), the stress remains compressive along its length except at its tip where a thinner, curved region of new oxide would be expected to form.	0
Stress will affect the diffusion of vacancies along the intrusion in two ways, implicit in Eq. :Here, (Jv)σ is the vacancy flux in the presence of stress, Cv is the vacancy concentration and Dv is the vacancy diffusion coefficient.	0
The second term in the brackets in Eq.  reflects the drift imposed by a stress gradient along the intrusion. For the case of the planar intrusion, (b), the gradient should be negligible and there will be no drift term. For the wedge-shaped intrusion there will be a stress gradient, as shown schematically in (a), and this will act on the volume change ΩB, the difference in volume between an oxygen atom and its vacancy. This is taken to be small and negligible because diffusion is occurring substitutionally. If it was occurring by interstitial transport then the volume term would correspond to the expansion caused by the interstitial and would not be negligible. For the present case, Eq.  simplifies to:	0
The local stress, σ, also affects the boundary conditions for vacancy concentration through its effect on the vacancy chemical potential. It results in a modified vacancy concentration given by [,]:	0
The subsequent model development follows that used to predict growth rates of an oxide intrusion ahead of a crack but is included here for completeness. Eq.  is used to define the diffusion boundary conditions, i.e. the vacancy concentration, (Cv)it at the tip of the intrusion and also that, (Cv)ib at its base where it joins the surface oxide layer. These concentrations differ and lead to a concentration gradient along the intrusion length, ℓ, to give the vacancy flux (Jv)σ in the presence of stress as:	0
The oxygen vacancy concentration at the tip of the intrusion is obviously larger than that at its base, otherwise O could not diffuse down its length in the counter flux of vacancies and allow the intrusion to grow even in the absence of stress. In fact, it is expected that (Cv)it >>(Cv)ib commensurate with the much smaller oxygen activity at the tip of the intrusion than at its base. Additionally, the role of stress will be to increase this difference because of the tensile conditions at the intrusion tip but compressive at its base. The reasonable assumption is then that the second term in the square bracket of Eq.  will be much smaller than the first and may be neglected. Noting also that the rate of growth of the intrusion is proportional to the vacancy flux, this stress-affected rate can then be approximated as:	0
This is essentially of the same form as Eq. . K is a constant that allows for the increase in intrusion size per O atom that emerges at the tip and is insensitive to the presence or absence of stress. The ratio, Sr, of growth rates in the stressed to unstressed state, σit = 0, can then be used as a measure of the SAGBO effect at a given intrusion length, ℓ.	0
The main purpose of this Discussion is to assess whether the SAGBO model described above can explain the observed results of enhanced intergranular penetration in stressed regions at plausible values of the intrusion tip stress, σit. The evidence and explanation provided earlier discounts surface oxide cracking as a potential mechanism. The parameter Sr of Eq.  gives the ratio of intrusion growth rates with and without stress for a given intrusion length, ℓ. The current tests have determined the stress effect on intrusion length rather than on its rate of growth and consideration now needs to be given to the integration of Eq.  to give intrusion length.	0
For the case that σit is invariant with both exposure time and intrusion length, Eq.  is readily integrated as:	0
to give the parabolic rate equation:	0
If σit were to vary with ℓ and t, Eq.  would be modified and parabolic kinetics would be unlikely to occur. This aspect is presently unresolved but helpful insights can be obtained from the work by Cruchley et al. [] who showed that parabolic intergranular oxidation kinetics occurred in this alloy, albeit tested in the absence of an applied stress.	0
The stress, σit, in Eq.  acts orthogonally to the plane of the grain boundary at the tip of the alumina intrusion and within that intrusion. Linear elastic conditions are then expected to apply. Three contributors to this stress can be identified and these may be superimposed:	0
Here, σox, is the stress generated within the intrusion by the dilatational strain produced on formation of the intrusion (). Its magnitude will vary with the intrusion shape but it will be tensile at the intrusion tip. The component σsp is the stress generated by the shot-peening operation. σap is the stress generated within the intrusion at its tip by the applied load. It will be tensile in the present tests with an expected magnitude between the applied stress and the fracture stress of the alumina intrusion. It will vary through the fatigue cycle in the same manner as the applied load.	0
The contributions made by σox and σsp to the intrusion tip stress were present at similar magnitude in Cruchley’s tests []. Parabolic kinetics were still found, however, indicating that neither parameter, nor their algebraic sum, varied significantly with intrusion length or exposure time. The dependence of σap is less clear but, to a first approximation, it will be assumed that it also is insensitive to these parameters. Eq.  is now used in Eq.  to isolate the contribution of σap:	0
Eq. , with σap = 0, reduces to that describing the kinetics of intergranular oxidation in regions of the specimen free of applied stress, i.e. Locations A and C shown in . This allows a SAGBO parameter, Sℓ, in terms of intrusion length at a given exposure time, to be defined as the ratio of Eq.  evaluated with σap ≠ 0 to that with σap = 0:	0
Here, ℓσ is the intrusion length at a given time in the presence of an applied stress (Location B in ) and ℓ0 is the corresponding value in the absence of an applied stress (Locations A and C). The variation of Sℓ with σap, calculated using ΩA = 2.07 × 10−29 m3 (Appendix), k = 1.38 × 10-23 J. K-1 and T = 1023 K, is shown in .	0
The values for Sℓ found in the present work ranged from 1.9 for Notch 1–2.5 for Notch 2 () and this range is shown as the horizontal shaded area in . The corresponding predicted tensile stresses (Eq. ) in the alumina intrusion at its tip are shown as the vertical shaded area in  ranging from ˜875 to ˜1250 MPa. These stresses represent an effective average value through the course of the fatigue cycle since the enhancement factors measured also represent an average value. The stresses are high but not excessively so for this high-strength superalloy and seem plausible. The peak section stress of 900 MPa applied to the specimen during the fatigue cycle will generate intrusion stresses higher than these “average” values, however, but there was no evidence that these caused cracking of the alumina intrusions.	0
It can be surmised from the cumulative probability plots of  and from  that intrusion stresses more than ˜500 MPa would be required to demonstrate with statistical significance that enhanced intergranular penetration was taking place. Such stresses could not be maintained in most alloys in which creep and plastic relaxation within the alloy matrix would occur. This may explain why experimental evidence for the SAGBO effect has been elusive and inconsistent. Recent generations of polycrystalline superalloys of high strength can be expected to demonstrate a SAGBO effect however.	0
Double edge notched specimens of the Ni-based superalloy RR1000 have been subjected to 1-1-1-1 fatigue tests with R = 0 at 750 °C in air for ˜ 105 cycles (111 h) at a peak section stress of 900 MPa. The specimens ran out with no detectable fracture damage or oxide cracking.	0
The oxide that formed during the test consisted of a surface layer of chromia, outcroppings of rutile and intergranular intrusions of alumina underlying the chromia layer. This oxide morphology is characteristic of this type of Ni-based superalloy. No effect of the applied axial stress on chromia thickness was detected by comparing the regions of maximum stress (base of the notches) with unstressed regions. By contrast, a significant increase in the depth of intergranular penetrations was found in the highly-stressed regions at the base of the notches. The increase in depth was approximately a factor 2 over that found in unstressed regions. This is taken to be evidence of Stress Aided Grain Boundary Oxidation (SAGBO).	0
A model for the SAGBO process has been developed in which the axial tensile stress within the alumina intrusion at its tip increases the oxygen vacancy concentration there. As a result, the vacancy diffusion flux along the intrusion from its tip will increase and lead to an enhanced growth rate of the intrusion.	0
Quantitative development of this model has been undertaken, albeit with a number of simplifying assumptions. Nevertheless, the results are encouraging and indicate that the observed increased intrusion depth can occur at a tip stress of around 1 GPa within the intrusion. This is considered plausible in this high-strength alloy but it implies that a SAGBO effect would be difficult to demonstrate experimentally in weaker alloys in which such large stresses could not be sustained.	0
Thanks are given to the centre for electron microscopy at the University of Birmingham for the provision of technical equipment and assistance that this work heavily relied upon. The authors also thank Rolls-Royce plc who provided the test material as well as contributing financially to this work along with the  through grant number EP/H022309/1.	0
The volume change on alumina formation is usually expressed by the Pilling Bedworth Ratio (PBR), conventionally defined as the ratio of the volume of alumina formed to the volume of metal consumed in its formation. The evaluation of the PBR for pure metals is straightforward and can be obtained from molar volumes and the respective densities of the two phases. For the case of alumina formed from pure Al the PBR is 1.28. The situation is less clear when Al is a constituent of an alloy as in the present case. The current consensus is that the molar quantities used should be those for the alloy, rather than the element, and that is the route taken here.	0
The effective volume, Ωm, of an Al atom in the alloy can then be calculated from molar volumes as:Here ρm is the alloy density, NA is Avogadro’s number (6.022 × 1023) and Mm is the average molecular mass of the alloy calculated by:Where fi is the atom fraction of element i, given in , Mi is its atomic mass, and the summation applies to all elements given in that table.	0
Using this approach, the mean atomic mass, Mm, is obtained as 57.11 g. Substituting this value into Eq.  with ρm = 8.54 g.cm−3 yields a value for the average atomic volume, Ωm, for RR1000 of 1.11 × 10-23 cm3 (1.11 × 10-29 m3). This is similar to the atomic volume of Ni of 1.10 × 10-23 cm3.	0
The effective Pilling-Bedworth ratio, Φ, for internal alumina formation in the alloy, is calculated using this value of the atomic volume for RR1000 on the basis that this is the effective volume occupied by an Al atom within the alloy. The molecular volume of alumina, ΩAl2O3, is then obtained in an analogous manner to Eq. :Where MAl2O3 is the molecular mass of alumina (101.96 g) and ρAl2O3 is its density (3.95 g.cm−3). The molecular volume is obtained as 4.29 × 10-23 cm3 (4.29 × 10-29  m3). Noting that two Al atoms are necessary to form alumina, the effective Pilling-Bedworth ratio is finally obtained as:and the volumetric expansion on the formation of a molecule of alumina is 0.93 (93%). The volume term ΩA, defined in the text by Eq. , is:	0
A full-angle cellular-dendrites growth mathematical model is proposed.	0
Smaller melt-pool radius-depth ratio can improve RL performance.	0
Larger melt-pool tangent angle can improve RL performance.	0
The damage cracks location has selectivity on the secondary orientation.	0
The electrical discharge machining (EDM) is now widely used to produce aeroengine hot end components . Recast layer (RL), with a typical rapid solidification microstructure, is an inevitable by-product of EDM on components surface. Some researchers suggest that some fatigue cracks on the superalloy blades are resulted from deterioration of RL tribomechanical characteristics . Note that the surface failure behavior, caused by RL, is usually considered as an irregular or uncontrollable incident, which seriously threatens the service properties of component, especially at high temperature .	0
The ring EDM surface, employed in film cooling holes producing, is different from traditional surface in wire electrical discharge machining or die-sinking electrical discharge machining . The plane RL consists of thousands of overlapping melt-pools stems from the same substrate orientation. According to relevant previous research achievements on EDM, the RL has similar solidification condition with laser melting and cladding, so cellular-dendrite is the fundamental microstructure and RL is considered to be comprised of tens of thousands of melt-pools which repeat the same microstructure. The ring RL, by contrast, is composed of diverse melt-pools which locate in different crystal orientation. The diversity of melt-pools orientation directly results in complex and diverse cellular-dendrite microstructure in ring RL.	0
Theoretically, the EDM drilling-RL can be described as single crystal (SX) structure and has excellent heat resistant performance . However, the ring imperfect SX RL has many local defects within a very limited scope, such as stray grain, low-angle grain boundaries and micro-pores . This is somewhat analogous to local defects in laser melting and cladding where low thermal gradient and high growth rate promote stray grains. Based on the relative research conclusions in RL, the dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundaries are the active defect sites closely related with substrate orientation, secondary orientation and melt-pool shape . The substrate orientations, melt-pool geometry and processing conditions could affect the quality of grown single crystals.	0
This study proposes RL failure prediction model and analyses the effect of melt-pool geometry on RL’s structural stability in terms of RL microstructure characteristics. The essential causes of RL failure are explained according to structural characteristics and different topology modes, while related hazard are expatiated. The consistency between theoretical conclusions and experimental results shows that the proper surface melt-pool geometry design can significantly reduce the risk of structural damage and provide reliable theoretical basis for failure analyzing and finally optimize technological design.	0
In practical film cooling holes process, the copper electrode first removes metal at rotary tip, then discharges it into a conical surface. As shown in , copper electrode discharges perpendicular to the inside wall and forms continuum melt-pool around the hole. Each melt-pool is recognized as formed perpendicular to inside wall and has a certain crystal orientation.	0
According to the real melt-pool shape, a mathematical model is developed for the single-crystal melt-pool solidification in EDM drilling. As shown in a, the solidification interface of 3-D elliptical sphere melt-pool is described by three geometrical parameters (r, h, α), with r being half the maximum width, h being the maximum depth of the melt-pool, and α being the angle between substrate surface and tangent of the melted trace in the transverse cross-section. The segment of an ellipsoid can be defined in the following equation:where a = b are the radius of ellipsoid melt-pool. Vn is the velocity of the dendrite tips normal to the solid–liquid interface. φhkl is the angle between the solidification normal and [hkl] direction. The growth velocities V[hkl] of the dendrite tip along specific crystallographic direction [hkl] are derived as:	0
For FCC nickel-based superalloys, the <1 0 0> directions are the six preferred crystallographic orientation directions on specific substrate . As shown in b, the components of the unit vector of the normal (n→) and n→ normal to the solid–liquid interface and the vector V[hkl] along a specific [hkl] direction in the x–y–z reference system can be defined as:where θ is the angle between the surface normal (n→) and the X-axis positive direction, φ is the angle between the surface normal (n→) projected on Y-Z plane and the Y-axis positive direction.	0
The angle φhkl characterizing the orientation of a specific <1 0 0> variant with respect to the normal n→ can be obtained as follows:	0
Theoretically, the dendrite growth direction graph can be plotted in unit melt-pool maximum cross-section, the discrete region corresponding to specific <1 0 0> growth directions around RL can be drawn according to the object model design.	0
In accordance with the actual melt-pool distribution around the hole (Ф = 0.4 mm), the RL cross-section is divided into fifteen separate unit ellipsoidal melt-pools. And each melt-pool of different secondary orientation around the ring RL has different cellular-dendrite microstructure. Melt-pool shape, especially radius-depth ratio (h/r) and tangent angle (α), can affect cellular-dendrite microstructure in unit melt-pool and thus change the whole ring RL cellular-dendrite distribution characteristics.	0
For a ring RL around the hole, the adjacent melt-pools mutually combine and form overlapped area at both sides of pools. The overlapped area length for one-side is set as one-tenth of melt-pool radius. As discussed in related articles, the dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundaries located at overlapped area are disgusting microstructure which could lead to structural failure , as shown in . So the RL cracks probability in the model can be expressed as P.where N is adjacent cellular-dendrite groups in RL cross-section, N1 is the number of entirely dissimilar cellular-dendrite groups, N2 is the number of partly dissimilar cellular-dendrite groups (caused by connection sequences), the probability coefficient λ equals to 0.5. But it is important to note that RL thermal fatigue cracks often originate from the upper portion of melt-pool boundary, so only dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundary at upper portion needs to be considered.	0
To obtain various melt-pool geometry on ring RL, EDM drilling are conducted with different processing parameters by hollow copper electrode (Ф 0.4 mm) with 2 MPa water pressure. The chemical composition of the SX Ni-base superalloy studied here is Ni-8.8Mo-7.2Al-2.5Ta-1.5Cr-1.4Re-0.01C (in wt%). All SX substrates are machined from a conventional DS SX cast ingot (standard heat treatment) with the [1 0 0] orientation normal to the drilling surface. The processed samples are heated to 1473 K, and kept 120 min before being cooled inside quartz tube to room temperature in the argon protection environment. Twelve sets of specimens are stored in 1323 K furnace for 4 min then cooled in water 30 s for circled fatigue experiment. The samples are checked once 10 times per turn to check whether it is in intact or damaged. All sample surfaces are ground by up to 4000-grit SiC paper and polished, then etched with 4 g CuSO4, 20 ml HCl and 20 ml H2O. The RL microstructure is characterized by FEI Quanta 200F scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with EBSD measurements and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analyzer. The applied step size ranged is 0.5 μm. The microstructure is further studied by using transmission electron microscopy (Technai F20 G2 200 kV). The transmission electron microscopy specimens are prepared by the standard procedures of mechanical grinding and ion milling.	1
The schematics in a based on colors are plotted according to the minimum velocity election criterion. The melt-pool shape factors, h/r and α is separately set to be 1 and 90°. Color blue, red and grey corresponds to the dendrites [1 0 0], [0 1 0], [0 0 1] respectively. As shown in a, unit melt-pool, located at [0 0 1] and [0 1 0] orientation around drilling direction [1 0 0], consist of three types of cellular-dendrite. Two kinds of them are distributed symmetrically by centre of sphere. The ring RL has complex and diverse cellular-dendrite microstructure on the hole circle and monotony cellular-dendrite microstructure characteristic in drilling direction. The melt-pool maximum cross-section distribution diagram can reflect cellular-dendrite distribution characteristic around the hole effectively.	0
In order to simplify the discussion, the ring RL is divided into eight equiangular independent melt-pools. The schematics can reflect dendrite orientations evolutional process of RL maximal cross-section. As shown in b, the melt-pool maximum cross-section is entirely composed of two types of cellular-dendrite, the distribution of which is obviously different and has gradual transition around RL among unit melt-pool distributed symmetrically taking [1 0 0] axis as the zonal centre when α = 90°. This means the secondary orientation plays a key role in cellular-dendrite distribution around the ring RL. Though the [1 0 0] cellular-dendrite does not appear in b, it is inherent in non-maximum cross-section as a potential factor at melt-pool centre as shown in a.	0
Specifically, the dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundaries, located at adjacent melt-pools, are undesirable interfaces that can quite easily lead to dangerous cracks . The cellular-dendrite continuity between melt-pools could reflect the RL structural stability. As shown in c, if RL is built with one-step processing method, there could be only four innocuous cellular-dendrite interfaces in circumferential. And more importantly, there is no melt-pool overlapped area around the RL, therefore no disgusting dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundary between adjacent melt-pools, so the ring RL maintains the cellular-dendrite continuity and structural damage tendency is reduced.	0
However, when RL is divided into eight melt-pools, eight dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundaries could be found among the adjacent ones in b. The RL cellular-dendrite continuous structure can be influenced by melt-pool number and unit melt-pool shape. Further, the different RL cellular-dendrite continuity will result in substantially different structural damage tendency. Fortunately, RL structural features can be effectively designed and accurately machined by discharging process control .	0
In order to simplify the influences of h/r on cellular-dendrite distribution, as shown in a, unit melt-pool in <1 0 0> is enumerated to illustrate how the cellular-dendrite distribution characteristic changes with different h/r in unit melt-pool when α = 90°. As h/r increases, the relative proportion of different <1 0 0> cellular-dendrites makes corresponding changes. The [0 1 0] cellular-dendrite zone radial length remains unchanged, but widens in circumferential and relative proportion of cellular-dendrite area expands. So the cellular-dendrite types between adjacent melt-pool edges may change suddenly and cause a ripple effect at overlapped boundaries around the RL.	0
Compared with melt-pool distribution in b, based on the actual melt-pool distribution, the RL (Ф 0.4 mm) contains an average of fifteen overlapped melt-pools at the maximal cross-section. The disgusting dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundary is substantially reduced, only a few can be found at particular location in b–d marked with color triangles. The cellular-dendrite continuity is improved obviously in RL.	0
In the further analysis, as shown in b–d and a, the RL cracks probability P presents with piecewise function as h/r increases. When h/r < 0.21, the cracks probability always stays 2/15. When h/r > 0.21, the probability suddenly rises up to 4/15 and remains unchanged. The h/r threshold is 0.21 when α = 90°. In single melt-pool layer, the unit melt-pool h/r can often mirror RL thickness. On a macro level, threshold thickness can somehow reflect P trend in RL.	0
The influence of the radius-depth ratio on the RL cracks probability is not a single one but interact with tangent angle to exert a concerted influence. Except 90°, the tangent angle is also set to 60°and 40° to evaluate the influence of radius-depth ratio on RL cracks probability. As shown in b and c, the relationship of h/r and P shows a parabolic trend when α equal to 60°and 40°. The P manifests a stepped increase when h/r is less than positive-negative curvature inflection point. The simulation results show that bigger tangent angle and greater segments number in P ascending branch leads to higher RL performance. The parabolic curve shows linear decrease when h/r is greater than threshold, 0.55–0.6 and 0.33 respectively at maximum P when α equal to 60° and 40°. The slope tends to vary gently with increasing α and becomes segmental straight-line at α = 90°, which means that the bigger α can gain a greater stability and a broader h/r window.	0
Overall, the calculating results show that RL thickness (reflected as h/r) directly influences RL cracks probability. As a result, no matter what value α is, the smaller RL thickness can effectively reduce the RL cracks risk. And control the unit melt-pool radius-depth ratio by appropriate machining parameters to reduce RL cracks probability is the most reasonable choice in EDM.	0
The tangent angle α is another important factor in cellular-dendrite distribution within unit melt-pool. a enumerates cellular-dendrite distribution characteristic when α increases from 30° to 90° in unit melt-pool located in [0 0 1]. To analyze the influence of tangent angle clearly, a more realistic h/r value is chosen. When h/r = 0.25, the proportion of [0 0 1] cellular-dendrite gradually decreases as α increases, while that of [0 1 0] increases. And when α < 50°, the [1 0 0] and [0 1 0] cellular-dendrite is not found. When α > 60°, the [0 1 0] cellular-dendrite zone radial length remains unchanged, but widen in circumferential and relative proportion of cellular-dendrite area expands.	0
Viewed from the influence by α increase on the overlapped area cellular-dendrite characteristic in b–d, the dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundaries number decreases from 8 to 4 as α increases from 30° to 60° when h/r = 0.25. As shown in b, the interrelation between RL cracks probability and tangent angle shows a step-declining trend as α increases. The P-α curve consists of three segments and the tangent angle turning points are 44° and 60° respectively.	0
The influence of the tangent angle on the RL cracks probability is not a single one but interact with radius-depth ratio to exert a concerted influence. Except 0.25, the h/r is also set to 0.17 and 0.35 to evaluate the influence of α on RL cracks probability. As shown in , three P-α curves show up as step-declining functions. The RL cracks probability P gradually decline by stages as α increases. It is only when h/r = 0.35 that the number of segments is changed from three to four. The optimum P range is located at the highest value α segment. As h/r increases, the P-α curve is shifted to the right and this increases the risk of RL failure.	0
Overall, the calculating results show that the tangent angle has an optimization range at the higher α end corresponding to a certain radius-depth ratio in a–c. This result indicates that the RL failure risk could be efficiently reduced by designing the unit melt-pool shape through adjusting process parameters.	0
In addition to analyzing the impact of melt-pool geometry, the model can also be used to analyze the relationship between crack location and secondary orientation on specific substrate. As shown in b, it’s worth noting that the dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundaries are primarily distributed in adjacent melt-pool located at [0 0 1] and [001¯] direction when h/r is relatively small. But when h/r is greater than threshold 0.21, the boundaries gradually disperse and go away from [0 0 1] and [001¯] direction in c and d. Given the relationship between dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundaries and cracks, the most dangerous structural damage orientation can be predicted effectively according to h/r at specific α. Thereby we can avoid maximum principal stress direction being vertical to dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundaries in structural design.	0
As to the secondary orientation effects on cracks probability with changing tangent angle, the dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundaries distribution experiences a scattering to centralizing process in b–d. The boundaries tend to change from scattered location to concentrated one in [0 0 1] and [001¯] and gradually decrease as α increases from 30° to 90°. So the fatigue cracks are most likely to initiate from the dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundaries located next to [0 0 1] or[001¯].	0
In addition to fatigue crack distribution at h/r = 0.25, the cracks distribution characteristics related to secondary orientation are also analyzed statistically when h/r is 0.17 and 0.35. As shown in , the dangerous points are decentralized and distributed around the central point when α is relatively small. As α increases, the scattered dangerous points are eliminated. The most dangerous crack points only exist next to [0 0 1] and [001¯] when α increases to the highest range. These trends indicate the correlation between secondary orientation and crack dangerous points should have universality.	0
According to the comprehensive analysis, RL structural damage behavior is relevant to secondary orientation, which is decided by melt-pool geometry (α and h/r). The change of [0 1 0] and [0 0 1] cellular-dendrite proportion gives rise to cellular-dendrite distribution change in circumferential direction of melt-pool, resulting in cracks probability fluctuation.	0
RL consists of numerous overlapped melt-pools. And each melt-pool represents one discharge process which can be designed and optimized for certain geometry . In terms of solidification conditions, RL-formation process is very similar to laser rapid modeling technique and microstructure is cellular-dendrite as shown in a. The [0 0 1] cellular-dendrite grow from substrate along the radius and average spacing is about 0.5–0.8 μm. The RL microstructure looks very similar to the close packed highly columnar structure in selective laser melting . The similar rapid solidification conditions indicate that RL has the potential to maintain the same single crystal structure as substrate just like additive manufacturing process in aviation industry. As shown in b, the RL rapidly solidified microstructure has the same orientation color and remains the same crystal orientation with substrate. In theory, RL could be regarded as a component part which has similar performance with substrate.	0
However, because of the violence of fusion-solidification, the RL inevitably contains many visible defects , for example, microvoids and stray grains along the dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundary at overlapped areas in c and d. And unfortunately, these binding sites are more susceptible to decay and damage. The integrated effects of thermal stress and structural stress can result in cracks formation and finally result in structural damage along the disgusting boundaries as shown in b . Based on ABAQUS simulating in invariable temperature service condition, the thermal stress is tension stress around hole inner surface. As shown in , the thermal stress is preferentially concentered on the melt-pool superficial junction. Considering micro-defects impact on RL structural strength, although the thermal stress has not exceeded the strength limit, fatigue cracks are still prone to initiate from the defects at the dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundaries between the adjacent melt-pools. The result provides evidence for the foundations of RL mathematical model.	0
In addition, melt-pool geometry and combinatorial modality have an impact on maximal stress and stress concentrated zone . As shown in , the differently shaped melt-pool groups exhibit distinct stress distribution. When the adjacent groups show the similar shape, the stress distributes uniformly around the unit melt-pool boundary. Otherwise, there exists obvious stress concentration along the overlapped melt-pool boundaries. The more different the shape, the more significant the stress concentration is. The result indicates that the difference in melt-pool geometry directly affects crack initiation location. The discharge instability may increase risk of RL stochastic damage. These provide further explanation that there exit some differences between RL failure behavior and the model prediction.	0
Appropriate processing parameters are employed in EDM drilling on (1 0 0) substrate to get different RL thickness. As shown in , some representatives of heat treated samples are selected to show the effects of melt-pool shape on RL failure behavior. The ring RL thickness is about 9 μm, 12 μm and 18 μm, respectively, and the relevant h/r is approximately 0.19, 0.27 and 0.34 in unit melt-pool. In order to avoid interference of oxidation, the quartz tube is evacuated and then filled with high-purity argon.	0
Based on comparative test in RL thickness, the number of dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundaries is related to RL thickness and it leads to damage cracks difference in number as shown in a–c. Among them, the RL sample with h/r = 0.27 and 0.34 have 2 damage cracks, while none in 0.19. According to statistics in 12 groups of comparative tests, there are nearly the same number of damage cracks in RL samples with h/r = 0.27 and 0.34, while that of 0.19 is less. The results show that when h/r > 0.19, the RL failure behavior will change irrevocably. The experimental threshold 0.19 is slightly less than 0.21 calculated. The model can effectively explain effect of radius-depth ratio (RL thickness) on failure behavior.	0
In addition, it’s worth noting that the damage cracks tend to initiate at melt-pool boundaries nearby [0 0 1] or [001¯] crystallographic orientations in b and c. The damage crack location has selectivity on the secondary orientation and damage cracks appear in pairs around ring RL. The effect of secondary orientation is consistent with the theoretical analysis on (1 0 0) substrate.	0
In addition to the cellular-dendrite distribution characteristic between adjacent melt-pools, the stress concentration can also induce stochastic crack at instable impulse discharge in c. If stress concentrated is large enough on local melt-pool boundaries as shown in d, stress concentrative point will drive crack initiation and thus cause different crack distribution in secondary orientation. Besides, the stress could promote oxygenation  and have significant effect on RL failure behavior in atmospheric environment. The stress concentration would be magnified unlimited and induced fatigue crack growth  along the melt-pool-substrate interfacial. That would reduce potential cracks extend into substrate to some extent and affect model prediction accuracy.	0
In order to represent the actual working condition more accurately, the 293–1323 K and 293–1223 K circled fatigue experiment are performed. Even though the failure causes have similarities, there are some key differences in fatigue crack initiation and propagation between RL failure process in thermal fatigue and high temperature exposure. Because of the large amounts of energy liberated per pulse discharge on very local scale, temperatures of a couple of thousand degrees Celsius develop in the immediate area of the discharge . High temperature results in some elements significant erosion. As shown in a, the Al-RL content decreases significantly compared with that of substrate, and this degrades high-temperature oxidation resistance. The coexistence of RL metastable characteristic and Al erosion microstructure promotes structural failure for thermal fatigue.	0
As shown in b and c, RL is easily to be eroded and oxidized and this leads to RL failure. After 40 thermal cycling, RL is already in a terrible oxidation state and crack tip appears along the molten-pool boundary in b. Though there are various deficiencies in RL, the RL structural integrity is not damaged yet. After 50 thermal cycling, RL segment leaves from the interface by high temperature and oxidation environment in c. The fatigue crack expands into substrate and propagates slowly. At this stage, the mitigation of tensile stress decreases the driving force for crack propagation and slows down the fracture propagation velocity . As shown in d, the fatigue cracks undergo an accelerating extension process and cause serious structure damage after 70 thermal cycling.	0
Compared to high temperature vacuum exposure, the thermal fatigue structure damage cracks has a significant decrease in 12 comparative thermal cycling groups between 293 K and 1323 K. Despite the contingency factors, RL merely fall off from the inner walls and it seems to lead to no structure damage for h/r = 0.19 samples after 70 thermal cycling in a. Similarly, only two samples (h/r = 0.27) have structure damage cracks after 70 thermal cycling, while three samples (h/r = 0.34) have suspected penetrating cracks after 70 times thermal fatigue test.	0
Though the thermal fatigue test does show a slight decline in RL cracks number, cracks distribution characteristics still express a preference for specific orientations. Of all the cracks, >70% damage is concentrated in or close to [0 0 1] or [001¯]. These statistical results indicate that the original failure mechanism still applies. Melt-pool geometry characteristics continue to impact RL thermal fatigue failure behaviors. But due to the influence of atmospheric environment and stress concentration, crack location and propagation path can be selective . The melt-pool dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundary is not an adequate criterion of the model. Both melt-pool/substrate boundaries and random defects are very likely to lead to RL damage. Fortunately, RL shedding does not damage the substrate structure, merely relieves the interfacial stresses. The oxidation rate and the crack propagation velocity together draw RL thermal fatigue damage.	0
Compared to 293–1323 K thermal cycling, although the RL has been oxidized, it seems to lead to no structure damage for h/r = 0.19 and 0.27 samples after 70 and 100 thermal cycling at 293–1223 K in a, b. Only a handful of samples have damage cracks after 130 thermal cycling for h/r = 0.35 in c and the vast majority of the holes still remain intact after 150 thermal cycling as show in d. This indicates that the temperature has a great effect on RL thermal fatigue damage . The conclusion tallies with the actual situation that the aeroengine blades rarely suffer from structural damage caused by RL at conventional service temperatures. However, with the development of aeroengine, the turbine inlet temperature is getting higher and higher, thus the influence caused by RL will gradually be more obvious. Fortunately, the proper melt-pool geometry design can significantly reduce the risk of structural damage.	0
This model not only reflects basic interrelationship between melt-pool geometry and RL structural damage behavior under actual production conditions, but also provides the scientific foundation on quality assessment of film cooling holes and offers reference and guidance for the structural strength design of EDM parts, so it acts as a general criterion on RL’s performance. And more importantly, optimal melt-pool geometry can be realized by EDM industrial design, so safety, economic benefits and longer life of aeroengine hot end components can be achieved.	0
In summary, the ring RL structural damage is closely related to unit melt-pool geometry around the hole on (1 0 0) substrate. The calculating results show that radius-depth ratio and tangent angle directly influence cellular-dendrite distribution in unit melt-pool and further influence the dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundaries around the ring RL.	0
For RL on (1 0 0) at α ≠ 90°, the number of the dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundaries first increases and then decreases as h/r grows. The thermal cracks have the greatest possibility at threshold h/r interval, and the threshold range gradually grows wider with α increase. While at α = 90°, P-h/r graph no longer has negative slope segment. In short, decreasing h/r to reduce RL cracks probability is the most effective choice in EDM. For a certain h/r, P-α graph shows a step decreasing trend, which means the thermal cracks probability P gradually declines as α increases. The calculation result indicates that the higher α value is, the lower the RL risk for structural damage. Further, the dissimilar cellular-dendrite boundaries mainly concentrate in melt-pool nearby [0 0 1] or [001¯] direction. The damage crack location has selectivity on the secondary orientation.	0
Much more importantly, the thermal exposure result verifies the availability of the model calculation that RL structural damage behavior is deeply correlated with unit melt-pool geometry and secondary orientation. RL thermal fatigue test reveals that RL structural damage behavior is closely tied to high temperature oxidation. The oxygenated RL contributes to promote RL falling off from the inner walls and lower the risk of structural damage to some extent. A series of experiments represent that the model analysis can provide reliable theoretical basis for quality control, failure analyzing and optimization designing of EDM drilling.	0
This work was supported by the National Nature Science Foundations of China under grant nos. U1435207, 51371014 and 51671015, and by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under grant no. 2014T70885.	0
Pre-oxidised Ni-based superalloy RR1000 was tested under high cycle fatigue at room temperature.	0
Both negative and positive effects of pre-oxidation are observed.	0
The critical stress of oxide cracking under fatigue (R=0.1) is between 700 and 800MPa.	0
Improved fatigue strength is also observed above this critical stress and is optimised at 900MPa.	0
Mechanisms for contrasting effects are proposed.	0
The role of environmental degradation in the mechanical performance of a component is important, particularly for aero-engine rotor discs which operate in high temperature oxidising environments under significant external loads. When these Ni-based alloys oxidise, a protective chromia external scale is formed along with the sub-surface formation of alumina both intergranularly and intragranularly . Beyond these is a weaker region depleted in γ′ particles (nominally Ni3(Al,Ti)) and grain boundary carbides (nominally M23C6). The formation of these sub-surface internal oxides is undesirable and may have a significant detrimental effect on the mechanical properties of the alloy . It has been postulated that the internal oxides that form at the grain boundaries have the potential to crack and introduce local stress concentrations which promote early initiation and therefore reduce component lives . Oxides are inherently brittle materials with tensile failure strains of <1% and K1c values for chromia and alumina in the range of 0.4–2.0MPam1/2. These are typically much lower than the underlying alloy, so it should be no surprise that it is possible for these oxides to fail under tensile loading.	0
Several studies on the Ni-based superalloys ME3, and Udimet 720 have found that prior oxidation reduces fatigue life and, in IN100, that the crack initiation life was similar to the number of cycles to cause the oxide to fracture . The tests performed on ME3, have shown that prior high temperature exposure in an oxidising environment (>700°C) for prolonged periods of time (100–2020h) have a detrimental effect on the high temperature (704°C) notched fatigue life . The thicker the external scale and the deeper the internal damage the more pronounced the reduction in life  which was thought to be due to the dissolution of M23C6 particles. Removal of the internally oxidised region did not lead to a complete recovery in high temperature fatigue life but the removal of the carbide dissolution zone did. Another study  using extensive prior exposures of ME3 (704°C for 439h) and Udimet 720 (650°C and 704°C for 100 or 1029h) found that the mean lives of pre-oxidised specimens had up to a 70% reduction in high temperature LCF life. A change of crack initiation was also seen from sub-surface (as-received) to surface (pre-oxidised). Performing the prior exposures in vacuum led to no reduction in fatigue life, illustrating that oxidation damage is driving the reduction in life .	0
The aim of the present work was to extend the previous research and examine the potential for intergranular internal oxides to act as preferential crack initiation sites and therefore affect the overall life of a component. This work concentrates on the fundamental understanding of the initiation between oxidation and fatigue. The use of pre-oxidised samples undergoing fatigue at room temperature was performed to isolate the effect of oxidation on the fatigue life. This allows the exclusion of any high temperature processes by removing the influence of creep deformation or oxidation ahead of the crack tip that would affect the fatigue crack growth. Bend samples have been used to restrict fatigue failures to the top surface region where the oxide resides.	0
A third generation, powder processed, γ′ precipitation strengthened Ni-based superalloy, RR1000, was used in this study. The chemical composition of the alloy is given in . The material had received a supersolvus solution heat treatment and subsequent ageing treatment which produced a coarse-grained microstructure (30–50μm) and a bi-modal dispersion of γ′ precipitates.	0
High cycle fatigue testing was performed at room temperature under four-point bend loading using a rectangular bar testpiece geometry (100mm×9mm×10mm). Testing was performed on either as-machined or pre-oxidised testpieces. In the as-machined condition the corners were chamfered to remove the potential for corner crack initiation and the specimens were subsequently cleaned and degreased in ethanol ultrasonically for a period of 5min before testing. The surfaces of the specimens were left as-machined with the low stress ground machine marks parallel to the direction of the applied stress. The surfaces of the specimens for pre-oxidation, however, were prepared by grinding and polishing to a Ra=0.3μm, with the edges and corners chamfered to the same surface finish to reduce stress concentrations. These were again cleaned and degreased ultrasonically in ethanol for a period of 5min. An Elite Thermal Systems Ltd. box furnace was pre-heated to 700°C into which samples were placed for pre-oxidation in laboratory air for time periods of either 100 or 2000h. Calibration was performed using an N-type thermocouple to ±5°C. Upon placing the specimens in the furnace a temperature drop of ∼50°C was recorded but the target temperature was regained within 10min. A pre-oxidised (2000h) specimen was used to check the effect of the aged microstructure on fatigue life. This was performed by removing all of the oxidation damage (external and internal) by grinding using 240 grit paper. Grinding marks were parallel to the direction of the applied stress.	1
Testing was performed at room temperature under a four-point bending configuration with a maximum applied stress of between 700 and 1000MPa. An Amsler Vibrophore HCF machine with a load capacity of 20kN was employed and a frequency of ∼75Hz was achieved on the current testpiece geometry. A span ratio of 20:60mm and a R ratio of 0.1 were utilised throughout. Testpieces that had not failed after 5×107cycles were deemed to be a runout and the specimen was removed from the test machine for further analysis.	1
The fracture surfaces of failed specimens were examined in a Phillips XL-30 scanning electron microscope (SEM) in order to understand the influence of pre-oxidation on the fatigue process. The top surface of the specimen, which was subjected to tensile stress during testing, was also examined for any cracking of the oxide scale. Care was taken in the preparation of metallographic sections due to the brittle nature of the oxides. Specimens were first mounted whole under vacuum in a low shrinkage, low viscosity epoxy resin. The region of highest stress was then cut out using a precision cutting machine at a low cutting speed (<0.05mm/min) before being re-mounted under vacuum in the same epoxy resin. Note that the section plane was parallel to the longitudinal direction and perpendicular to the top surface which had been subjected to tensile stress. Samples were then polished to a final stage of 0.25μm diamond solution or OP-S colloidal silica solution before being cleaned ultrasonically in ethanol and imaged using a Jeol 7000F field emission gun (FEG) SEM. Chemical etching was performed by swabbing the surface of the sample for 30s using Kalling’s reagent or through a 60s immersion in a selective γ′ etchant (compositions in ).	1
Nano-indentation was performed on a cross-section of a specimen oxidised for 500h at 800°C, using a Micromaterials Ltd. Platform 3 NanoTest machine. The indentations were performed at 1μm intervals in a diagonal pattern across the specimen, starting within the Ni-plate and progressing through the oxide into the bulk alloy. The indents were performed using a Berkovich indenter under a load controlled setting to a maximum load of 30mN. A loading rate of 1mNs−1 was used. Once the indenter reached the maximum load this was then held for a short period of time (∼30s) before being removed from the specimen, giving a load vs. displacement graph. The hardness of the material was then calculated from the tangent to the unloading curve.	1
Vickers microhardness testing was also performed on a cross-section of an as-machined specimen and an aged specimen (oxide removed), using a Struers Durascan 50 automated microhardness machine. It was performed using a 0.3kg load, with an average value being taken from 12 indents.	1
Previous studies on the Ni-based superalloys Udimet 720, ME3 and RR1000 under cyclic fatigue or dwell fatigue conditions found no change in oxide composition compared with the unstressed condition but did record an enhancement of the oxidation damage . This illustrates that using pre-oxidation as a method of isolating the effect of environmental damage on fatigue performance is a reasonable approach. The typical oxide morphology of the pre-oxidised RR1000 is complex, as shown in the cross-sections in . A more detailed description of the oxidation damage and confirmation of the composition are provided in previous studies on this alloy . The oxide is composed of a continuous external layer of chromia and extensive sub-surface formation of alumina, which penetrates the substrate both intergranularly and intragranularly. The intergranular penetrations are deeper and often continuous whereas the intragranular penetrations consist of smaller isolated particles within the grains. A significant γ′ denuded zone encompasses and exists ahead of this internal oxide. Ahead of this zone is a region within which the Cr–Mo rich grain boundary phase has dissociated ((c)). This phase is often assumed to be M23C6 carbides but could possibly be sigma phase . The depth of each type of oxidation damage is shown in  for each exposure time. The oxidation damage increases in thickness and depth with increasing time and temperature, the kinetics of which are described elsewhere .	0
Nano-indentation was performed (with an applied load of 30nN) in order to evaluate the variation of mechanical properties across the different zones affected by pre-oxidation.  shows the results from a sample after oxidation at 800°C for 500h. The hardness value of the external oxide layer is 7.4GPa but this gradually reduces through the zone of internal oxidation until a minimum is reached in the γ′ denuded zone before increasing again into the matrix. Clearly a softer layer is sandwiched between the outer oxide shell and the matrix. It is reasonable to suggest that the reduction in yield stress in the γ′ denuded zone is proportional to the reduction in hardness values. The yield stress of the matrix is about 1010MPa, hence the yield stress in the γ′ denuded zone can be estimated to be around 810MPa (using the average hardness value in the γ′ denuded zone and in the matrix). The formation of this weaker region has been reported previously .	0
The results of room temperature high cycle fatigue (HCF) tests obtained using pre-oxidised and as-machined testpieces are compared in . At a stress level of 700MPa, all testpieces ran out at 5×107cycles, indicating that this stress level is close to the fatigue endurance limit. The fatigue behaviour of the as-machined testpieces was broadly as expected but there was a typical level of scatter in the results as can be appreciated from . Some judgement is required in drawing a trend line but that shown in , demonstrating a decrease in life with increasing stress above the fatigue endurance limit, seems reasonable. It is understood that the majority of total fatigue life of the as-received testpieces is spent on initiating fatigue cracks and early propagation near threshold, for such smooth and small laboratory testpieces . This argument is supported by a simple estimation of propagation life from a natural defect size of 100μm (measured ALA grain size) to catastrophic failure using a Paris law:where C=1×10−10 and n=3.81, with da/dN and ΔK in the units of mm/cycle and MPa√m. The numbers of cycles to failure at peak stress levels of 800, 900 and 1000MPa were calculated to be 490,000, 310,000, and 210,000 respectively (shown by a dashed line in ).	0
A sharp reduction in fatigue life of up to two orders of magnitude, compared with those of the as-machined testpieces, was observed in the pre-oxidised testpieces at a stress of 800MPa. A larger reduction in life was seen with the longer pre-exposure, i.e. presumably with the associated increased depth of oxidation damage. With further increase in applied stress, the fatigue life of pre-oxidised testpieces increased instead of decreasing, as would have been expected from the behaviour found for the as-machined specimens. Such a trend continued up to an applied stress of 900MPa where all the pre-oxidised testpieces ran out at 5x107 cycles. At the highest stress level investigated here, 1000MPa, a significant deficit in the fatigue life of the pre-oxidised testpieces was again evident. Comparing to the estimated proportional crack propagation life, it is clear that such a deficit comes from the small number of cycles required to initiate fatigue cracks for the pre-oxidised testpieces tested at 800MPa and 1000MPa.	0
In order to clarify whether ageing during the oxidation exposure has played any role in the fatigue behaviour of the pre-oxidised testpieces, a single test was undertaken using a pre-oxidised specimen (700°C for 2000h) with the top oxide scale and oxidation affected zone removed. The result is shown as the star symbol in . The specimen failed at ∼1.3×107cycles, under a maximum stress of 900MPa, which is consistent with the results observed for the as-machined testpieces. This is substantially less than the corresponding pre-oxidised samples which remained un-failed at 5×107cycles (). This result, although limited, indicates that it is the oxidation process not microstructural ageing caused by prolonged exposure at 700°C that causes the increase in room temperature fatigue life at this relatively high stress level (900MPa). In fact, significant microstructural changes may not have occurred during the pre-oxidation period since the microhardness of both as-machined and the aged specimen were identical at 459Hv (±1 standard deviation of 6.1 for the aged material and 7.6 for the as-machined).	0
The crack-initiation location in the as-machined specimen and pre-oxidised specimens are compared in . At room temperature and in the high cycle fatigue regime, it is generally observed that slip bands tend to form in the larger grains and lead to the initiation of fatigue cracks although the contribution of neighbouring grains, by having nearly-similar Schmid factors, cannot be disregarded . The crack initiation site observed in the current study for the as-machined specimens at 800MPa was beneath the surface and associated with a relatively large grain facet (∼60μm) ((d)). Such large grains do not necessarily occur within the shallow high-stress layer at the top surface of the specimen and this variability is a possible reason for the large discrepancy in life at a maximum applied stress of 800MPa in the as-machined condition. In all cases around the initiation site, fatigue crack growth demonstrated a faceted manner, which dictates the characteristics of the near threshold crack growth at room temperature. With further crack extension, the faceted crystallographic appearance is replaced with flat transgranular growth, which is typical of crack growth at higher stress intensity factor ranges, within the Paris regime. At high stresses, 900MPa and 1000MPa, the initiation site in the as-machined specimens shifted from sub-surface to the surface and only a single initiation site was recorded on the fracture surface. However, several surface-breaking cracks within the inner span region (confirmed on the cross-section analysis) illustrate the potential that more initiation sites were present but with only one dominating the fatigue life. Similarly, the aged specimen showed a similar surface initiation at a maximum applied load of 900MPa.	0
The fatigue crack initiation sites of the pre-oxidised specimens occurred at the surface in all cases (). Multiple surface initiation sites occurred on the fracture plane at a maximum applied stress of 1000MPa ((b and c)) but a single initiation was present at all other stresses. Apart from the location and distribution of these sites, the fracture surface morphology was very similar. This indicates that the oxides were the source of crack initiation whilst having little effect on room temperature fatigue crack growth. This is expected because the current investigation was deliberately carried out at room temperature to avoid potential interactions between the environment and crack growth behaviour. It is known, for example, that the crack propagation rate is increased and the crack path changes from transgranular to intergranular when high-temperature fatigue tests are conducted in air rather than vacuum .	0
In previous work using cylindrical specimens , a clear shift was found between sub-surface crack initiation without oxidation to surface initiation in the presence of oxides. This dramatic change was not generally found in the present bend tests because the highest in-plane stress was located at the specimen surface. Nevertheless, near-surface crack initiation did occur in the unoxidised as-machined specimen at a stress of 800MPa. In this case, the initiation site was associated with a large grain ((d)).	0
Before preparing metallographic sections, the top surfaces of the tested specimens were examined under the SEM, to check whether there were any surface cracks present within the gauge section. Numerous cracks were found on all pre-oxidised specimens except those tested at 700 and 900MPa. Surface-breaking cracks could also be observed near the fracture surface on the area of maximum tensile stress. These have been reported previously  for pre-oxidised specimens tested at 800MPa but were found here at stresses of 900 and 1000MPa in both pre-oxidised and as-machined testpieces (). Note that the cracking of the external oxide scale was always perpendicular to the stressing direction, whereas it was around 45° to the stressing direction in the as-machined testpieces. This indicates a different mode of failure, with crystallographic slip dominating in the as-machined testpieces and oxide cracking dominating in the pre-oxidised testpieces. No cracking of the external oxide was seen in the runout pre-oxidised samples tested at 700MPa and 900MPa.	0
Metallographic sections were prepared to provide insight into the crack initiation process in pre-oxidised testpieces and to identify the initiation sites. (a) clearly shows a surface-breaking crack cutting through the external chromia scale, penetrating down an intergranular internal oxide and proceeding into the alloy in a pre-oxidised specimen (2000h) at a maximum applied stress of 800MPa. A large number of similar cracks at 30–50μm intervals occurred within the area of maximum stress, with each one being associated with an intergranular internal oxide. In all cases, these cut through the external chromia scale, penetrated down an intergranular internal oxide and proceeded into the alloy (). Electron channelling contrast imaging and chemical etching were used to reveal the microstructure around these cracks. It was found that the cracks penetrated through the base alloy either by following a crystallographic facet ((b)) or the grain boundary () in the vicinity of the surface.	0
A large single crack was found in the shorter pre-oxidised condition (100h at 700°C) at a maximum applied stress of 800MPa ((c)). This crack seems to have originated in a similar manner as those in the longer pre-oxidation specimens, in that it cut through the external and intergranular internal oxide before progressing into the alloy by following crystallographic facets. This is not unexpected since the surface region is the area of highest tensile stress and these intergranular internal oxides are inherently sharp brittle features with low fracture toughness. The tensile failure strains (<1%) and fracture toughness of both chromia (K1c∼2.0MPam1/2)  and alumina (K1c∼0.4–1.0MPam1/2)  are significantly lower than for the bulk alloy. It is then feasible that these oxides crack preferentially leading to early fatigue crack initiation at a maximum applied stress of 800MPa and result in a deficit in total fatigue life.	0
This mechanism is supported by a previous study which found that surface oxide cracking and crack initiation are closely correlated  although it is currently unclear whether the surface or sub-surface oxide cracks first. No cracking of the external oxide occurred above an intragranular internal oxide at the stress of 800MPa nor was any cracking of the intragranular oxides recorded at any stress. One reason that only the internal intergranular oxides crack is that these oxide intrusions are longer than the intragranular oxide particles. The anisotropic nature of deformation between neighbouring grains could also impose strain concentrations on the intergranular oxide intrusion. It is also now thought that such intrusions will develop stress fields during their formation because of the associated volume expansion on oxide formation and that enhanced tensile stresses will exist over part of the intrusion length .	0
Above 800MPa, an increase in fatigue life is found in the pre-oxidised specimens, with specimens at 825 and 850MPa exhibiting longer lives and specimens at 900MPa running out. This occurred in both of the pre-oxidised conditions (100 and 2000h at 700°C). No cracks were visible in the sectioned 900MPa specimen but cracks were seen in the external oxide scale in both the 825 and 850MPa specimens. No cracks were observed beneath the external scale in the intragranular or intergranular internal oxides at maximum applied stresses between 825 and 900MPa. Above this stress range, at a maximum outer fibre stress of 1000MPa, failure occurred quickly (2–4×105cycles) and numerous cracks were found in the area of maximum stress in both the external oxide scale and the intergranular alumina intrusions, often then penetrating further into the alloy (). This behaviour indicates the stress, σf, at and above which extensive failure of the oxide phases and within the particle-denuded zones lead to a catastrophic reduction in fatigue life.	0
Sudbrack et al.  suggested that failure within the carbide dissolution zone (e.g. ) was the main cause of the high temperature notched fatigue life deficit in the Ni-based superalloy ME3, where weakened grain boundaries were thought to be the sites of initiation at high temperature . In the present case, the Cr–Mo rich grain boundary phase dissolution zone is present appreciably beyond the crack and internal oxides ( and ) with the crack penetrating into this zone. It is thought that these Cr–Mo rich grain boundary phases are M23C6. It seems that these carbide-free grain boundaries could provide a weak path for the crack to propagate once it has initiated although they could also inhibit crack growth, at lower stresses, as a result of localised stress relaxation within the weaker grain boundary region.	0
The level of stress within the chromia surface layer after pre-oxidation and prior to fatigue testing is not well established although it is expected to have a large in-plane compression component but further discussion is given later. One objective of the present work was to establish experimentally the room temperature applied tensile stress at which oxide cracking would be observed and, clearly, at 800MPa () cracking of the oxide has occurred. At this stress level, the reduction in fatigue lifetimes resulting from pre-oxidation is also substantial (1–2 orders of magnitude) as can be seen in . From the hardness measurements and estimated yield stress of this zone, as discussed earlier, it is expected that negligible yield will have occurred at this (and lower) stress levels and that cracks nucleated within the oxide will propagate readily across this zone and into the bulk alloy (Figs. (c) and , for example). A deleterious effect of oxidation due to early crack nucleation results.	0
Within the higher stress range (σmax, R=0.1) of 825–900MPa, an increase in fatigue life for the pre-oxidised samples over those observed at 800MPa was found. At the highest stress in this range (900MPa) the fatigue life of the pre-oxidised samples is even longer than those of the as-received samples. This beneficial effect of pre-oxidation is considered to be related to yielding of the γ′ denuded zone, for which a yield stress of about 810MPa was estimated earlier based on hardness measurements. The associated plastic relaxation within this zone would inhibit cracking of the external oxide scale and/or crack propagation from the oxide to the bulk alloy ((d) and (e) and lead to an improvement in fatigue endurance. Apparently such an effect will have its limit, however, and there certainly is a loss of the benefit of oxidation between 900 and 1000MPa. At 1000MPa, extensive cracking of the oxide scale occurs and a significant reduction in total fatigue life results; this damaging effect of oxidation is similar to that found at a stress level of 800MPa. The mechanisms described above are captured in a schematic diagram in .	0
Another schematic diagram comparing the fatigue lives of as-machined and pre-oxidised specimens is shown in  in order to aid this present discussion. The shaded area in this diagram shows that the improvement in fatigue lives resulting from pre-oxidation exists only over a range of intermediate stresses. The lower stress, σy, is taken to be just above the yield stress of the γ′ denuded zone and is between 800 and 825MPa and it is only at and above this stress that relaxation processes within this zone can confer improvements in fatigue life. At and above the upper limit, σf, (between 900 and 1000MPa), failure occurs rapidly in the pre-oxidised samples and short lifetimes arise. This stress may correspond to the UTS of the precipitate denuded regions so that, at higher levels of stress, the load-bearing capacity of the denuded zones is exceeded and early failure can be expected. It should be noted that these precipitate-free zones exist not only beneath the surface oxide but also along alloy grain boundaries () where fast crack propagation might be expected at high stresses . A schematic diagram for the mechanism of fatigue crack initiation in pre-oxidised specimens is shown in . This illustrates that at an applied stress of 800MPa and 1000MPa cracking of the external oxide scale and intergranular internal oxides occurs, thus causing early crack initiation and a significant reduction in fatigue life over the as-machined condition.	0
One uncertainty in this discussion is the actual level of stress present in the outer region of the testpiece. A simple calculation based on the generation of differential thermal strains within a thin surface oxide layer having a planar interface with the alloy is given in the . This indicates that a large compressive stress of around 1.8GPa would be expected to develop in-plane in the external scale upon cooling to room temperature after a pre-oxidation exposure at 700°C. This seems unlikely, however, because there is clear evidence (e.g. ) that the chromia layer cracks in a tensile manner on the application of a stress of only 800MPa. The corresponding in-plane tensile strain is ∼0.3% (calculated using a Young’s modulus for chromia of 270GPa) and this falls within the range of values (0.002–0.95%) of the tensile fracture strain of chromia variously reported in the literature . This wide range probably reflects a range in the length of crack-like defects within the oxide. This agreement suggests that the actual strain at room temperature in the oxide layer of the pre-oxidised specimens is essentially zero and that the imposed values of stress during fatigue testing and used in this discussion are realistic. The discrepancy with the simple calculation undertaken in the  may be associated with a number of factors such as the non-planarity of the oxide/metal interface, the ability of the underlying γ′ denuded zone to relax stresses both at temperature and during cooling, and the development of compressive in-plane stresses sub-surface during the formation of alumina intrusions. Clearly, further work will be needed to clarify the actual processes involved.	0
The effects of prior oxidation on the fatigue performance of a coarse-grained RR1000 have been studied at room temperature using four-point bend rectangular testpieces. The following conclusions can be drawn.	0
Pre-oxidation at 700°C in air for either 100 or 2000h produced a continuous surface oxide scale mainly composed of a protective chromia layer, approximately 1.5μm thick, after the longer exposure period. Sub-surface, both intergranular and intragranular intrusions of alumina were also present with the former extending to ∼3μm beneath the surface oxide layer at the longer exposure time. Ahead of the zone of internal oxidation was a region depleted in γ′ precipitates and this region was notably softer in microhardness than the bulk alloy.	0
At applied surface stresses less than ⩽800MPa and at 1000MPa, pre-oxidation appreciably reduced fatigue lives compared with as-machined specimens. Unexpectedly, at stresses intermediate between these values, pre-oxidation resulted in an enhancement of fatigue lives. This benefit of pre-oxidation is attributed to plastic yielding of the weaker γ′ denuded zone which either effectively relaxes the stress concentration introduced by the cracking of the chromia scale and intergranular internal oxides or prevents cracking of the external oxide/intergranular internal oxides.	0
The fatigue-life deficit in the pre-oxidised specimens at the lower applied stresses (⩽800MPa) was associated with a change in crack initiation location from sub-surface (in as-machined specimens) to surface sites. This indicated that oxidation and not crystallographic facets was the cause of early crack nucleation in the pre-oxidised samples.	0
At the higher applied stress (1000MPa) the fatigue-life deficit was associated with rapid crack propagation through the γ′ depleted zone and along grain boundary paths depleted in M23C6 precipitates. It is likely that such large stresses exceed the UTS of the matrix alloy in the absence of particulate phases.	0
The authors acknowledge, with thanks, Prof. H. Dong for the provision of the nano-indentation equipment. The financial support provided by UK  (EPSRC) and  are also gratefully acknowledged.	0
The in-plane stress can be estimated for thin oxides on a thick substrate using the following equation :where σox is the in-plane stress in the oxide layer, Eox is the Young’s modulus of the oxide, αmet and αox are the thermal coefficient of expansion of the metal and oxide respectively, ΔT is the temperature change (initial temperature minus final temperature) and vox is the Poisson’s ratio of the oxide. In the case here parameters for the thermal co-efficient of thermal expansion are shown in . Assuming a room temperature of 20°C (293K) a temperature drop of 680K would occur. The Young’s modulus of chromia is 275GPa  and has a Poisson’s ratio of 0.29 . The in-plane compressive stress developed during cooling would be 1.8GPa.	0
Investigating application of micro-oxidation in improving bonding strength.	0
The extent of micro-oxidation influences the microstructure and strength of joints.	0
Wedge interlocking interface may be obtained after micro-oxidation process.	0
Chemical reaction takes place on the porous interface of C/C materials.	0
The shear strength of joints has been enhanced 36.73%.	0
Carbon fiber reinforced carbon matrix (C/C) composites have received much attention for their extraordinary stability and excellent mechanical properties at elevated temperature , which are one of the most potential materials used as nose cone, leading edge of aircraft and nozzle of solid rocket motor in aerospace field. However, it is difficult for C/C composites to fabricate large-size complex components because of their brittleness . Nickel-based superalloys such as GH3044 are widely used as high temperature structural material that possesses high toughness and strength, good oxidation and corrosion resistance . The successful connection of C/C composites and GH3044 can remarkably extend their application for large parts at high temperature.	0
Currently there are two troubles in joining C/C composites with metals. Firstly, C/C composites are difficult to be wetted by most metals or alloys . Secondly, large difference of the thermal expansion coefficients (CTE) between C/C composites and metals will result from high residual stresses in joints and reduce the joining strength . Partial transient liquid phase (PTLP) bonding method  characteristically combines with the advantages of brazing and diffusion welding, whose advantages of small deformation, low bonding temperature and high joint strength make it an effective approach to join dissimilar materials . Through this technique small amount of eutectic liquid can be formed at low temperature that could wet the bonding interface, weaken the thermal stress concentration in joints and chemical react with base materials, which benefit the connection between composite and alloy very well. Controlled porosity interface and ductile metal interlayer could also release the residual stress in a ceramic-metal joint . Surface pre-oxidation process should obtain a porous surface without damaging the interior materials , which might provide a friendly interface to join the parent materials.	0
According to the structural features of C/C composites, the micro-oxidation as surface modification means is proposed to get a coarse and porous surface structure. Moreover, due to the preferred oxidation of carbon matrix, some fibers on the surface of C/C composites can play the similar role like whiskers , nanowires  and nanotubes  to toughen the interface between C/C and interlayer, which in turn improving the bonding strength. In this paper, we introduced PTLP method to connect C/C composites with GH3044 superalloy using Ti/Ni/Cu/Ni multiple foils as the interlayer. C/C composites were pre-oxidized before joining to obtain the porous surface. The microstructures of C/C composites after carrying out micro-oxidation treatment for different periods were investigated. The effects of micro-oxidation process on the interface characters and mechanical properties of joints were also studied.	0
Two-dimensional needle-punched C/C composites prepared by chemical vapor infiltration with a density of 1.75 g/cm3 were used in this work. The samples were cut from the as-prepared raw material with size of 15 mm × 10 mm × 4 mm. Then cleaned them ultrasonically in ethanol for 30min and dried at 353 K for 2 h. Specimens were placed into a muffle furnace at 1073 K for 2, 4, 6, and 8 min for micro-oxidation process respectively. After being oxidized, the specimens were cooled down to room temperature in air for use. To calculate the mass loss (W) of every sample, the masses before and after micro-oxidation process were measured using an electronic balance with sensitivity of ±0.1 mg. The mass loss equation is as follows:where m0 and m1 denote the masses of specimens before and after oxidation, respectively.	1
GH3044 samples with size of 15 mm × 10 mm × 4 mm were polished by 2000 grit SiC paper and cleaned ultrasonically in ethanol for 30min, then dried at 353 K for 2 h. The composition of GH3044 is shown in . To prepare the interlayer, Ni, Ti and Cu foils with thickness of 30 μm, 30 μm and 600 μm respectively were mechanically machined into 15 mm × 10 mm × 4 mm rectangle just as the same size of parent materials. Ni and Ti foils were cleaned ultrasonically, while Cu foils were cleaned in pickling bath to remove oxide film on their surface.	1
Ni, Ti and Cu foils were placed in a certain order between micro-oxidized C/C and GH3044 samples to form a “sandwich” structure as shown in . This sandwich-like structure was assembled into a graphite clamp mold and placed in a vacuum hot-pressing furnace for PTLP process. As-prepared specimens were heated up to 880 °C with heating rate of 10 °C/min and maintained at this temperature for 30min under pressure of 4.5 MPa for element diffusion between foils and parent materials. After that, joining temperature was further risen up to 1030 °C with a heating rate of 5 °C/min and retained for 30min under pressure of 0.3 MPa. In this stage, Ti and Ni foils were partially melted into eutectic liquid, which was responsible for wetting base materials and chemical bonding of C/C composites and GH3044. After that, the joint was cooled to room temperature in furnace chamber with cooling rate of 2 °C/min. The whole preparation process of joints is schematically shown in .	1
To investigate the bonding strength of joints, the single-lap compressive shear test was performed in this project. The test was conducted on a CMT5304-30 KN universal test machine with loading rate of 0.5 mm/min. Joint shear strength can be calculated by the following equation:where τ is the joint shear strength, F denotes the maximum load and S is the joining area. Four specimens, with the size of 15 mm × 10 mm × 4 mm, were used for each test. The clamp for shear strength test is shown in .	1
The cross-section and fracture morphologies of C/C-GH3044 joints, together with element distribution, were analyzed by JSM-6460 scanning electron microscopy (SEM) equipped with Oxford INCA energy X-ray dispersive spectrometer (EDS). Phase composition of the fracture surface was identified by X'pert Pro MPD X-Ray diffraction (XRD, Cu K α). To further characterize the surface of specimens after micro-oxidation for different periods, laser scanning confocal microscope (LSCM) was employed to investigate the surface roughness of C/C composites. And the thermal shock tests were carried out in an electrical furnace in air.	1
 shows SEM micrographs of the surface of pre-oxidized C/C composites at 1073 K for different time in air. (a) reveals the morphology of C/C composites without micro-oxidation, presenting that carbon fibers are surrounded by carbon matrix tightly without cracks or pores on the surface of C/C composites. After oxidation pre-treatment for 2, 4, 6, 8 min at 1073 K in air respectively, circular gaps appear at the interface between carbon matrix and carbon fiber as shown in (b)–(e). That is because the fiber/matrix interface is preferential to be oxidized which is an active area due to the clear difference of microstructures between carbon fibers and carbon matrix . With extension of oxidation time, the width and depth of circular gaps increase rapidly, the diameter of carbon fibers gradually decrease from 6.5 μm never oxidized to 4.5 μm oxidized for 8 min. Coarse and porous surface structure is generated on the surface of C/C composites, which can provide a diffusion path for liquid phase to infiltrate into C/C substrate to form a transition layer with an interlocking boundary structure during PTLP process. When oxidation time extends to 8 min shown in (e), carbon matrix is seriously oxidized and fibers isolate from one another. In addition, the diameter of carbon fibers decrease slightly compared with (a)–(d), which demonstrates that carbon fibers have been oxidized to some extent.	0
The mass loss curve of C/C composites after micro-oxidation for different time is shown in  (a). It can be seen that the mass loss increases with the duration of micro-oxidation. Combining with , the mass loss is mostly attributed to the oxidation of carbon at fiber/matrix interface which is consumed extensively by reacting with oxygen during micro-oxidation process. So, the surface roughness increases with the prolongation of micro-oxidation time as shown in (b). The surface three-dimensional micrographs of C/C composites after micro-oxidation treatment () shows that the color of surface turn from green to yellow, orange and the color distribution is getting uneven, which illustrates that the surface is becoming more rugged and the depth of pores produced by micro-oxidation increase gradually from 0 μm never oxidized to about 150 μm oxidized for 8 min. This kind of porous structure is very helpful to the deep infiltration of partial transient liquid phase, which is expected to form a strong bond between C/C composites and GH3044.	0
 reveals the cross-sectional backscattering electron micrograph images of joints close to C/C composites. As shown in (a), there is a clear straight interface between bonding layer and C/C composites without micro-oxidation. With increasing micro-oxidation time, the interface gradually becomes nonlinear shown in (b)–(e). That is because wider circular gaps fabricated by micro-oxidation treatment can provide a smoothly diffusion path for transient liquid phase during PTLP process. More eutectic liquid fills into these circular gaps on C/C composites at high temperature, which produce a wedge interlocking interface between C/C composites and bonding layer. But as the micro-oxidation time is 6 or 8 min ((d) and e), some holes and cracks are found at interface because transient liquid cannot completely fill the large gaps formed by micro-oxidation for too long time. The existence of these micro defects will reduce the bonding strength of joints.	0
The amplification cross-section backscattering electron image of the joint close to C/C composites () shows that there are two circular reaction layers around carbon fibers, dark grey circular layer (A zone) and light grey layer (B zone). Through EDS results shown in the lower left corner in , dark grey phase should be mainly composed of TiC, while light grey phase would be composed of TiC and TiNi compounds. So the eutectic liquid formed in PTLP process has reacted with carbon and contributes to the chemical combination between C/C composites and bonding layer. The mechanical interlocking and chemical combination are highly beneficial to enhancing joint strength.	0
The average shear strength curve of joints at different micro-oxidation time is revealed in . The shear strength reaches the maximum value at micro-oxidation for 4min (32.09 ± 1.98 MPa), 36.73% higher than that of the joint without micro-oxidation process (23.47 ± 1.15 MPa). According to the backscattering electron image of fracture surface of joints without micro-oxidation ((a)), the fracture surface after shear tests looks flat without obvious carbon fibers exposed. Once load is applied on the joint, cracks would expand quickly with weak resistance and finally runs through the entire joint, forming a nearly straight crack path. When micro-oxidation for 2min, the work of mechanical interlocking and chemical combination elevate the shear strength. With extension of micro-oxidation time, fracture surface gradually becomes rugged with carbon fibers exposed as shown in (b)–(e). We can infer from the findings that cracks in joints has deflected more times than that of no micro-oxidation joints. Particularly, some cracks deeply penetrated into C/C composites presenting a non-linear crack path. XRD patterns of fracture surfaces of joints after shear tests ((f)) also confirm that the amount of Ni3Ti, the reaction product of bonding layer, decreases and carbon grows with the increase of micro-oxidation time, which explain the transient liquid infiltrate into C/C composites more deeply and react with carbon to form an inlaid interlocking structure during PTLP process. Crack propagation encounters resistance from the interlocking interface, leading to crack deflection through the whole joint as load is applied. And the crack deflection could increase the joint toughness by releasing stress and delaying fracture, which is advantageous to improve the bonding strength .	0
However, with micro-oxidation time further increasing to 6min and 8min, there are lots of micro defects at the interface between C/C composites and bonding layer that appear subsidence area in (d) and (e), and carbon fibers are seriously damaged by excessive long micro-oxidation process. Although interlocking interface could improve the bonding strength, defects and damaged carbon fibers become fatal defects during shear tests. Cracks propagate through the defective interface with little resistance, resulting in the failure of the entire joint with a lower bonding strength. Hence, the strengths of joints pre-oxidized for 6min and 8min are lower than that of joints pre-oxidized for 4min, and the fracture surface is destructed more seriously.	0
The thermal shock tests were performed in order to verify the effect of micro-oxidation on the bonding strength of micro-oxidized samples.  reveals the joint shear strength curves of samples micro-oxidized for 0 min and 4 min respectively with the number of thermal cycles between room temperature and 500 °C. From , it can be found that the bonding strength of samples without micro-oxidation decrease rapidly and the joint become invalid completely at the fifth thermal cycle. But the curve of micro-oxidized samples is relatively even during the whole thermal shock test. After thermal shock 5 times, the strength of samples micro-oxidized for 4 min still retain 65% (from 32.09 MPa to 21.08 MPa). It can be seen that the micro-oxidation can not only improve the connection strength, but also significantly improve the thermal shock resistance of joints.	0
C/C composites have been joined with GH3044 superalloy using Ti/Ni/Cu/Ni multiple foils as bonding interlayer by a two-step technique of micro-oxidation and PTLP process. Coarse and porous surface structure is formed on the surface of C/C composites by micro-oxidation, which provides the way to form a mechanical interlocking between C/C composites and bonding layer. The eutectic liquid produced during PTLP process could react with carbon at the porous interface. The shear strength of joints reaches a maximum of 32.09 ± 1.98 MPa after micro-oxidation for 4min, which is 36.73% higher than that of the joint not submitted to micro-oxidation. The mechanical interlocking and chemical combination contribute to improving the mechanical properties of joints. The Micro-oxidized joints have extraordinary ability of thermal shock resistance.	0
This work has been supported by the  under Grant No. 51432008, the  of China under Grant No. 105-QP-2014, the  under Grant No. JCYJ20160531172042899, the  under Grant No. 6142911050217.	0
Machining is one of the major manufacturing processes in engineering production and it plays an important role in modern industry. The understanding of the metal cutting process is rendered difficult due to the complex mechanics of the deformation taking place. In a typical machining process, the work material undergoes severe deformation in a small zone with strains from 1 to 10, strain rates in the order of 103–106s−1 and temperatures in the range of 0.16–0.9Tm. These unique features of deformation in metal cutting make it hard to describe the ensuing material behaviour using conventional material tests.	0
To date cutting-conditions are typically selected through empirical tests and also knowledge and experience of operator due to the intricate physics of metal cutting processes . Therefore, there is a strong need for numerical models capable of forecasting cutting forces, residual stresses, temperatures, tool wear etc., that are strong functions of cutting conditions—which are crucial to product-quality. Such models will also reduce the number of machining tests conducted for optimizing the machining process.	0
In recent years the finite element (FE) modeling technique has become an important numerical tool for simulating the machining process. Cutting processes encountered in practice are often oblique, which corresponds to a three dimensional problem that requires intense computational capability and also time to carry out the complex analysis. In order to overcome these difficulties, a two dimensional model called the plane-strain orthogonal machining, which is adequate to understand the mechanics of the cutting process has been developed and many research efforts have gone into the FE modeling of orthogonal cutting  for accurately predicting machining parameters and thereby optimizing the process. Finite element models of the orthogonal process are capable of producing realistic results if the material behaviour at high strains and high strain-rates commensurate with the actual process is simulated appropriately.	0
Constitutive models describing the material flow behaviour as a function of strain hardening, strain rate hardening and thermal softening are required for the conditions encountered in the machining process . An ideal constitutive equation should have lesser number of material constants that can be identified from a limited number of experiments and have a basic form well suited for computational codes. Several constitutive models  have been proposed that are broadly classified into three categories based on their method of derivation and identification of constants as empirical, semi-empirical and physics-based models. Empirical models describing flow behaviour are developed from empirical observations and the constants are subsequently identified by fitting the empirical equation to the experimental stress-strain data obtained from mechanical tests . Due to a lack of physical basis, empirical models exhibit minimal flexibility but are widely used due to the limited number of inherent constants that are available for various materials . The Johnson and Cook model  is a popular representative of empirical models that has been successfully used for a variety of materials for various strain rates and temperatures .	0
The development of semi-empirical models is based on the underlying physics but constants-identification is carried out like empirical models by fitting the equation to the experimental data. Among the semi-empirical models, the Zerilli-Armstrong model  has been applied successfully to a variety of materials . Zerilli-Armstrong model derivation is based on the use of dislocation-mechanics, i.e., initial dislocation density and dislocation motion, for material flow stress calculations. Zerilli and Armstrong have developed distinct relations for each of the face centered cubic (FCC), body centered cubic (BCC) and hexagonal close packed (HCP) structures based on the rate-controlling mechanism for that particular structure .	0
Physics-based constitutive equations are derived using specific physical theory. Such equations including mechanical threshold stress (MTS) model based on interaction of dislocations with obstacles  and Preston model considering dislocation drag effects  give accurate description of material behaviour over a wide range of both temperatures and strain rates. These relationships are not widely used because of the difficulty involved in determining their material constants from precisely controlled experiments . In addition, these models involve a larger number of constants than empirical models .	0
Among empirical and semi-empirical models, the Johnson-Cook (JC) and Zerilli-Armstrong (ZA) constitutive relationships are mostly preferred because of their simplicity and also due to their availability in many commercial finite element software. The ZA model is preferred to JC, because the latter does not consider the influence of the coupled effects of strain and temperature and of strain rate and temperature . Because of its detailed formulation, the ZA model also exhibits a greater flexibility than the JC model . However, the original ZA model does not include the absolute effect of strain rate and the coupled effect of strain and temperature  and accordingly a modified version of the ZA model was developed by Samantaray et al. , to account for these deficiencies, for low strain rates and elevated temperatures.	0
In this work, the ZA model developed by Samantaray et al.  is further modified to make it suitable for describing the material behaviour over the entire range of machining conditions. The constitutive data required for calibrating the material constants is generated from machining tests using the distributed primary zone deformation (DPZD) model  since the wide range of data required cannot be generated by conventional material tests. The proposed constitutive relation is later implemented in a FE model of the orthogonal machining process on ABAQUS/Explicit platform by means of user material subroutine, VUMAT. The efficacy of the proposed constitutive relation is tested and validated for the nickel based super alloy, Inconel 718, by following three types of evaluation procedures. In the first evaluation method, the flow stress distribution evaluated using the proposed constitutive model for the given cutting conditions are compared with the predictions made using the DPZD model. In the second evaluation procedure, cutting force prediction made by the FE model of orthogonal machining with the proposed constitutive relation is compared with the experimental values available in literature. The proposed constitutive relation is further validated in the third procedure by matching the predicted flow stress distribution with results from the split Hopkinson pressure bar (SHPB) tests available in literature. The proposed material model is validated for describing the material behaviour at machining conditions which encompass a wide range of strain, strain rate and temperature compared to other production processes. Hence the proposed relation can be utilised as constitutive model for other three dimensional processes such as extrusion, oblique cutting, milling and drilling.	0
The Johnson and Cook model considers strain hardening, strain rate hardening and thermal softening as mutually exclusive with the flow stress of a material being represented as a function of strain, strain rate, and temperature . The von Mises flow stress, σ in the JC model is given by,where A is the yield stress at a reference temperature and a reference strain rate, B and n are parameters pertaining to strain hardening, C represents the strain rate sensitivity, m is the thermal softening exponent, εp is the plastic strain, ε˙*=ε˙/ε˙0is a dimensionless strain rate with ε˙ being the actual strain rate and ε˙0 is the reference strain rate provided by the user, and T, Tr and Tm are workpiece, reference and material’s melting absolute temperatures, respectively. The JC model is purely empirical in nature and is widely applied because of its simplicity, availability of material parameters for various materials and the basic form being well suited for computational codes . It has a minimum number of constants, which are calibrated using experimental stress-strain data at different strain rates and temperatures. However, the JC model neglects the coupled effects of strain and strain rate with temperature thereby incorrectly implying strain rate independence of temperature .	0
Zerilli and Armstrong  proposed a dislocation-mechanics based constitutive relation for material flow stress calculations, which for FCC materials is expressed as,where σ is the von Mises flow stress,ε is the equivalent plastic strain, ε˙ represents the equivalent strain rate, T is the absolute temperature of the workpiece and C0, C1, C2, C3 and n are the five material parameters. The ZA model is based on the idea of thermally activated motion of dislocations to overcome barriers and also interaction of individual dislocations. The movement of dislocations during plastic deformation by slip is obstructed by two types of obstacles: long- and short-range. The long range barriers have their stress fields extended over a larger distance and thermal energy is not sufficient to overcome these barriers while the short range stress-field can be surmounted by thermal activation .  lists the different long- and short-range barriers encountered during dislocation motion.	0
The thermal activation that operates over a smaller area of the slip plane can assist the applied stress in moving a dislocation past the short-range obstacles as shown in . Therefore, the flow stress of a material can be additively decomposed into an equivalent athermal stress σa and an equivalent thermal stress σth as follows :In Eq. , the thermal part of flow stress is due to thermal activation and hence is dependent on temperature while the athermal part for FCC materials is proportional to the shear modulus G and is almost independent of temperature except for the small variation of G with temperature . In the case of FCC materials, the strain hardening shows a stronger dependence on both temperature and strain rate. The thermal component of flow stress for FCC	0
materials is physically interpreted as the resistance to dislocation motion by the mutual interaction of dislocations . The yield stress of an FCC material is independent of both temperature and strain rate and so the athermal part of the flow stress is a constant and equal to the initial yield stress . In the ZA model for FCC in Eq. , the constant C0 represents the athermal part and the remaining portion forms the thermal part of the flow stress. The ZA model is preferred over JC because it considers the coupling of strain rate and temperature . The limitation of the ZA model is that it cannot be used for flow stress prediction at lower strain rates and at temperatures greater than 0.7Tm.	0
In order to overcome the inadequacies of ZA model as presented above for the FCC crystal structure, a modified version was developed by Samantaray et al.  to predict the flow behaviour at low strain rates and also elevated temperatures for titanium-modified austenitic stainless steels, which is given below,where the constant C1 represents the initial yield stress, C2 and n are parameters pertaining to strain hardening, C3 incorporates the effect of temperature, C4 defines the coupled effect of strain and temperature, C5 describes the effect of strain rate and C6 represents the coupled effect of temperature and strain rate. T and Tref are the workpiece and reference temperatures respectively, ε˙is the equivalent plastic strain rate and ε˙0 is the reference equivalent plastic strain rate. The rationale behind this modification is given in the effort by Samantaray et al. .	0
The modified ZA model developed by Samantaray et al.  does not consider the athermal part of the flow stress since the model is applied for predicting flow behaviour at elevated temperatures where the yield stress is entirely dependent on temperature. In order to utilize the modified ZA model for the FE modeling of orthogonal machining, the athermal portion of flow stress has to be included as shown in Eq.  so that it can be applied for a range of machining conditions corresponding to temperatures between 0.16Tm and 0.7Tm.	0
The constant C0 in the proposed model is added to represent the athermal part of the flow stress and the remaining constants are same as in the modified ZA model developed by Samantaray et al. . The athermal component of the proposed model, which is independent of both temperature and strain rate, is equal to the initial yield stress of the material that was used in the original ZA model for FCC materials. The constant C1 representing yield stress is dropped from the thermal part of the modified ZA model in Eq.  since the yield stress is independent of temperature. Therefore, the proposed constitutive relation considers strain hardening, strain rate hardening, thermal softening and the coupled effects of strain and strain rate with temperature. The inclusion of the athermal part in the ZA model for FCC materials as in Eq.  allows material behaviour simulation at all temperatures until the flow stress becomes entirely temperature dependent.	0
The constants required for the constitutive model have to be calculated from the machining test data of stress, strain, strain rate and temperature so as to accurately simulate the metal cutting process. The in situ measurement of stress, strain, strain rate and temperature during the machining process is difficult  when compared to the recording of force signatures, which can be obtained with a dynamometer during a machining test. There is no standard material testing procedure that can generate the extreme values of stress, strain and strain rate occurring in the machining process. Although constitutive data can be generated using conventional material testing procedures like the tension, compression, torsion and SHPB tests, they cannot reach the levels of strain and strain rates encountered in the machining process and hence affect the accuracy of the calculated constants that in turn hinder the predictions of the numerical models .	0
Machining tests have been utilized for gathering data, so as to overcome the inadequacies of conventional tests, which in conjunction with the analytical models such as Merchant  and Oxley  can be used to obtain the values of σ,ε,ε˙andT. The Oxley model, as shown in , retains the relationship of forces and velocities as in the single shear plane Merchant model, but also considers the influence of strain, strain rate and temperature by using a parallel sided shear zone in which the shear plane opens up with a finite thickness . The Oxley model	0
is also based on a rectangular shaped shear area despite the shear zone being fan shaped for low cutting speeds and the thickness of the zone getting reduced and tending to a plane at higher cutting speeds , see . The Oxley model can be used to predict the values of σ,ε,ε˙and T in the primary shear zone using cutting conditions, i.e., rake angle, cutting velocity and uncut chip thickness and, measurements, i.e., chip thickness and cutting and thrust forces. The Oxley model gives a set of average values of σ,ε,ε˙and T in the primary zone for a given machining test and these values do not cover the entire variation in the primary zone.	0
As an example, the calibration of constants for the Johnson and Cook relation through the Oxley model will require five different machining tests for generating five sets of constitutive data. In general, the number of experiments increases for larger numbers of constants. In order to overcome this limitation of Oxley model, Tounsi et al.  proposed a distribution scheme for σ,ε,ε˙and T in the primary shear zone for obtaining large sets of constitutive data from a single cutting test. However, distributions of stress and strain rate predicted by this scheme were not accurate  and the stress distributions were unrealistic. Shi et al.  proposed an alternative distribution scheme called the distributed primary zone deformation (DPZD) model to overcome the shortcomings of the effort proposed by Tounsi et al. .	0
The DPZD model  is based on the parallel sided shear zone of Oxley and it considers only a portion of the primary shear area where the shape approximates a rectangle, as seen in . A parallel sided shear zone is superimposed on the fan shaped shear area and a part of the zone close to the rectangle is considered to evaluate distribution of σ,ε,ε˙and T.	0
The assumptions made for the DPZD model include plane strain conditions; continuous chip formation; distribution of σ,ε,ε˙and T in the primary shear zone depending only on x direction and; the primary shear zone being equally divided into two parts . Accordingly, the DPZD model can accurately predict distributions of σ,ε,ε˙and T for a rake angle of 0° at relatively higher cutting speeds from 10 to 200m/min because the central portion of the primary shear zone gets extended over a larger percentage of the shear area where these predicted distribution trends remain unchanged .	0
The proposed constitutive relationship is validated for the nickel based super alloy, Inconel 718, by using the orthogonal cutting data available in the effort reported by Shi et al. . Inconel 718, a precipitation strengthened nickel-iron based super alloy, is characterized by an FCC structure with a high strength even at elevated temperatures due to the presence of fine precipitates. Continuous chips are generated by orthogonal machining for cutting speeds in the range of 10m/min to 45m/min and shear localized chips begin to form beyond 61m/min .	0
The data for Inconel 718 generated by Shi et al.  using the DPZD model for the cutting conditions and measurements given in , respectively, will be utilized in the present study for calibrating the constants of the proposed model. As shown in , the analytical equations of the DPZD model were used to predict the distribution of σ,ε,ε˙and T fields in the primary shear zone for the T1 cutting condition. Thus the DPZD model provides a range of values for σ,ε,ε˙and T from a single cutting test.	0
The material constants for the proposed model are determined by the least squares technique as given by Eq.  and, implemented in MATLAB, by using the constitutive data generated by the DPZD model of the previous section.where K is the total number of data sets and i refers to the ith data set. The material constants so determined for Inconel 718 are given in .	0
The proposed ZA model is validated through three different evaluation procedures as outlined below.	0
Compare the flow stress distribution predicted by the DPZD model with values from the proposed model to evaluate the goodness of fit.	0
Use the proposed relation in the FE model of orthogonal cutting and compare its cutting force predictions with experimental measurements.	0
The flow stress predicted by the proposed model will be compared with the SHPB test data to further ensure the validity of the proposed relation	0
The goodness of fit of the proposed relation with DPZD model is validated by comparing their respective flow stress distributions for the cutting conditions listed in . The results for the comparison along with similar validation results for JC and ZA models are listed in . The constants for the JC and ZA models and experimental measurements, i.e., chip thickness and forces, for the cutting conditions listed in  are available in the effort of Shi et al.  and were utilized for calculating the flow stress values. As seen in , the proposed material model accurately predicts the qualitative trend of flow stress distribution while similar forecasts by JC and ZA models being not good.	0
The summary of regression results for the three models are given in  and, the proposed model has a minimum residual sum of squares (RSS) and a maximum coefficient of multiple determination (R2) values among the models compared for all cutting conditions listed in , thereby suggesting that it gives a better fit.	0
The proposed ZA model is further assessed by implementing it in the FE simulation of orthogonal cutting of Inconel 718 under the cutting conditions listed in . The predicted cutting force and chip thickness values are compared with the experimental results available in the effort of Shi et al. .	0
A commercial explicit finite element software, ABAQUS/EXPLICIT 6.12-3, is used for carrying out the fully coupled thermomechanical analysis for investigating the validity of the proposed ZA model in the orthogonal cutting process. The coupled Eulerian-Lagrangian model (CEL) as developed by Arrazola et al. , shown in , is utilized in this study for carrying out the FE simulations. Such a CEL model has also been utilized by Adibi-Sedeh and Madhavan , Ozel and Zeren , Haglund et al.  and Arrazola et al.  for the orthogonal machining process. The CEL model combines features of both lagrangian and eulerian analyses with eulerian boundaries defined for the workpiece at the inflow and outflow ends and at the top edge of a predefined chip and lagrangian boundaries for the upper and lower surfaces of the workpiece as depicted in . Moreover, the CEL model requires neither a chip separation criterion nor a predefined crack, thus avoiding the significant deterioration of elements during the simulation of deformation around the tool cutting edge. The chip morphology evolves continuously until the simulation reaches steady state resulting in the final chip thickness value being different from the initial guessed value. Although several days of computational time are required for a typical equivalent lagrangian model, CEL analysis requires less than 10h per simulation.	0
The proposed ZA model given by Eq.  is implemented in the ABAQUS/EXPLICIT platform by means of a user material subroutine (VUMAT) written in FORTRAN 77. The material constants of the model for Inconel 718 are given in . The orthogonal cutting conditions for the FE analysis are shown in  with the corresponding experimental results being taken from the work done by Shi et al. . The tool rake angle was kept constant at 0° and cutting conditions listed in  were selected to produce continuous chips of Inconel 718. The cutting tool in this FE model is assumed to be rigid and held stationary with no permissible displacements or rotations. A radius of 20μm is used to model the sharp cutting edge of the cutting tool for all the tests . The solution treated- and aged-condition of Inconel 718 was determined by comparing the flow stress data available in Shi et al.  with those reported by Ghosh et al. . The material properties of Inconel 718 as reported by Shi et al.  and, shown in , were assigned to the workpiece, which is also allowed to move in the direction of the cutting velocity. The boundary conditions used in the FE model are shown in , where constraint on material specifies a Lagrangian boundary condition whose mesh motion is tied with the material and constraint on mesh is an Eulerian boundary condition whose mesh motion is untied with the material. The cutting velocity is specified as inlet velocity boundary condition and no outflow velocity will be defined on the material.	0
Since the mesh density affects the chip morphology and also cutting force predictions  of the FE model, a finer mesh is created around the tool tip, which is prone to severe distortion and the mesh gets coarser away from the tool tip towards the edges of the work piece as shown in . Several trial simulations were conducted to analyse the mesh sensitivity and an optimal mesh was found to have a total of 1700 elements with the minimum and maximum sizes being 10μm and 200μm, respectively. The chip formation process is simulated through the adaptive meshing technique that combines the features of both Lagrangian and Eulerian analyses . As seen in , adaptive mesh constraints are applied on the outflow, inflow and chip flow edges in order to reduce element distortion. A four-node quadrilateral, linearly interpolated and fully coupled plane strain element, CPER4T, with automatic hourglass control and reduced integration was used for the FE simulation.	0
The friction mechanism at the tool chip interface is complex in metal cutting and has a significant influence on the finite element predictions of cutting forces and also chip morphology. The most widely applied friction model in machining was proposed by Zorev  and it consists of two distinct contact regions namely sticking and sliding along the tool-chip interface. The sticking region is close to the cutting edge subjected to a high normal stress causing severe plastic deformation. The sliding region located after sticking and extending to the point where the chip leaves the tool is subjected to a low normal stress causing the chip to slide along the rake face of the tool. The implementation of this frictional behaviour in FE simulations is ignored because of its unavailability in commercially available software. Hence a popular approach  consisting of a mean coefficient of friction is applied over the entire tool-chip interface.	0
In this study, an extended Coulomb friction relationship given as a generalized model in ABAQUS  was utilized. The penalty contact method with finite sliding is employed to represent the frictional conditions at the tool-chip interface. A series of FE simulations were conducted with different friction coefficients and μ=0.5 gave cutting force predictions that matched well with experimental results with a maximum error of 8% .	0
The cutting force (Fc) encountered during machining is more sensitive to the material constitutive law than any other feature of FE  and hence Fc is used to confirm the evaluation procedure. In this regard,  summarizes the FE predictions of both cutting force and chip thickness corresponding to the cutting conditions given in . This table also lists the related experimental values obtained from the work of Shi et al. . The predicted cutting forces are in good agreement with the experimental results with the error being less than 8% for most of the cutting tests. The chip thickness is over estimated because of Eulerian chip boundaries as indicated by Arrazola et al.  and also due to a less accurate friction model applied to the tool-chip interface . However the chip thickness predictions are better than those predicted using the JC model as shown in .	0
The cutting force decreases with increase in cutting speed and our FE model with the modified ZA relation correctly predicts this trend as is evident in . The validation of the constitutive relation is further presented in , where the chip thickness and cutting force predictions are compared with those from both the JC model and experimental data. The chip morphology continuously evolved until reaching a steady state, at which the predicted distribution of the field variables remains unchanged. The steady state chip morphology and von Mises stress distribution for the entries of  are shown in . Continuous chips are generated, as is evident in the contour plots of , since no alternate zones of high and low von Mises stress values typical of serrated chips are seen in these plots thereby confirming experimental observations. The predicted effective strain distribution shown in  for cutting tests A1 and A7 exhibits maximum value of strain in the primary shear zone and the strain gradient reaches zero as it moves past the primary shear zone thereby confirming the effective strain distribution shown in . Due to friction higher values of strain than those in the primary shear zone were observed for a smaller portion of the chip in the secondary shear zone, see .	0
The FE validations performed in this effort show that the proposed ZA model gives better estimates of both cutting force and chip morphology and hence can be used as a constitutive relation for simulating the machining of Inconel 718. The proposed relation can also be utilized for similar materials with FCC structure because of their identical material behaviour. The effectiveness of the proposed model is further validated in the next evaluation procedure using data from the SHPB test.	0
As shown in , the flow stress predicted by the proposed ZA model is compared with results from SHPB tests conducted by Shi et al.  for two different strain rates of ε¯˙=1100s−1 and 1300s−1 at room temperature.  plots the values of true stress against those of true strain. Since stress equilibrium is not achieved during the initial loading phase, stress values at strains less than 0.4 have been disregarded for comparison . For strain values greater than 0.4 the stress reaches a steady state and compares well with the flow stress predicted by our model as seen in .	0
In this study, a modified constitutive model is proposed that is based on the Zerilli- Armstrong relation for metallic materials with a face centered cubic structure. The modified model considers effects of strain hardening, strain rate hardening, thermal softening and also coupled effects of strain and strain rate with temperature on flow stress. The constitutive data required for calculating the material constants were generated from machining tests and application of the distributed primary zone deformation model. The proposed material model was validated for describing the flow behaviour of Inconel 718 in orthogonal machining. In the first part of a three-pronged evaluation process, the relation was tested for its ability to predict the trend of flow stress distribution in the primary shear zone. In comparison to Johnson-Cook and Zerilli-Armstrong models, the flow stress distribution predicted by the proposed relation correctly matched the trend in the primary shear zone along with a maximum error of 8% to those described by the distributed primary zone deformation model. Statistical measures have also indicated that our model produced better results compared to the Johnson-Cook and Zerilli-Armstrong relationships.	0
In the second part of the evaluation process, the effectiveness of the proposed model is validated through the finite element analysis of orthogonal machining process. The proposed constitutive relation was implemented in the ABAQUS/Explicit platform and a coupled Eulerian Lagrangian model was used to simulate the orthogonal cutting process of Inconel 718. The cutting force predictions were in excellent agreement with the experimental data and the discrepancies were less than 8% for all simulated cutting conditions. The proposed model generated a continuous chip as observed in the experiments and also gave a better estimate of chip thickness for different cutting speeds and feeds than the Johnson-Cook relation. The predicted flow stress values were further validated in the third step of the evaluation procedure by comparisons with the split Hopkinson pressure bar test data, which also showed good agreement. Therefore, the proposed constitutive model for Inconel 718 can be utilized to accurately simulate the orthogonal machining of this super alloy and other materials with a face-centered-cubic structure. Furthermore, the proposed relation can also be applied for simulating oblique machining processes that represent real-time three dimensional cutting.	0
When the content of yttrium reaches to 0.43%, some multiphase regions appear.	0
When the content of yttrium reaches to 0.43%, some Ni17Y2 chains appear.	0
The morphology of M6C changes with increasing concentration of yttrium.	0
The Ni–16Mo–7Cr–4Fe alloy with 0.05% yttrium performs the best mechanical property.	0
The Ni–16Mo–7Cr–4Fe alloy with 0.05% yttrium performs the best oxidation resistance.	0
Hastelloy N alloy is a nickel-based alloy. It was invented at Oak Ridge National Laboratory as a container material for molten fluoride salts in 1970s and showed good corrosion resistance, oxidation resistance, neutron irradiation resistance and high temperature strength in high temperature molten salt reactor . Ni–16Mo–7Cr–4Fe alloy manufactured by the Institute of Metal Research in Shenyang is a nickel-based alloy similar to Hastelloy N alloy. It will be used as structural material of molten salt reactor instead of Hastelloy N alloy in China. Firstly, it is difficult to purchase a large amount of Hastelloy N alloy directly. Secondly, next generation nuclear energy system will work at 1073K or even higher temperature, beyond the temperature capability of Hastelloy N alloy. As container material, Ni–16Mo–7Cr–4Fe alloy works in the harsh environment of high temperature, high pressure, molten fluoride salts and oxygen gas. The existing performance of Ni–16Mo–7Cr–4Fe alloy does not meet higher temperature requirements of next generation nuclear energy system. Its mechanical properties and oxidation resistance under high temperature need to be further improved. This problem is expected to be solved by rare earth microalloying modification.	0
A nickel-based superalloy has excellent mechanical properties mainly due to its solid-solution strengthening, precipitation strengthening and grain boundary strengthening effects . Addition of rare earth elements such as Y and Ce, is usually a main consideration in alloy design because of their effects of grain boundary strengthening and solid-solution strengthening. As a rare earth (RE) element, yttrium has been applied successfully in many fields such as metallurgy , chemical and surface engineering . Recently, yttrium has been regarded as a promising alloying element for superalloy. In fact, a series of beneficial effects of yttrium doping in alloys have been reported. Yttrium improves many properties of materials such as creep property of cast stainless steel , stress rupture property of nickel-based superalloy , oxidation resistance of nickel-based alloy , Fe–Ni–Cr ternary alloy  and Co-based alloy . The promotion of formation of other phase , promotion of phase transformation , formation of less harmful phases by counteraction with other deleterious elements  and formation of fine dendrites  were thought to be beneficial mechanisms of yttrium doping. However, there is little work on effects of yttrium on microstructure and strength performance of nickel-based superalloys.	0
In this paper, effects of yttrium on the microstructure, mechanical properties and oxidation resistance performances of Ni–16Mo–7Cr–4Fe alloy were investigated and discussed. These researches may help extend usable critical temperature of nickel-based superalloys for molten salt energy systems.	0
The exact chemical compositions (in wt.%) of Ni–16Mo–7Cr–4Fe alloy with five different levels of yttrium (G00, G05, G12, G21, G43) are shown in , determined by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). Master alloys supplied by the Institute of Metal Research in Shenyang, were melted in a vacuum induction furnace and various amounts of yttrium were added before casting. The ingots were hot rolled to 2mm in thickness at 1453K. These sheets were held at 1450K for 10min and aged at 1173K for another 20h in KSL-1400X muffle furnace, followed by water-quenching. Specimens (22mm×8mm×2mm) for tests were cut from the heat-treated sheets.	1
Specimens were washed by ultrasonic in absolute ethanol, mechanically mirror-polished using SiC papers up to grade 1500 # and diamond pastes up to 0.5μm. All specimens were then washed with ethanol–acetone binary mixture by ultrasonic bath for 10min again. An etching solution with 40ml HCl+10ml H2SO4+3g CuSO4+50ml H2O was used for metallography. Grain sizes were measured by determining the mean liner intercept of grains using optical microscopy. The microstructure of specimens was observed using a LEO 1530VP scanning electron microscope (SEM) and a Tecnai G2 F20 transmission electron microscope (TEM) with an energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) to conduct qualitative and semi-qualitative analyses. The thin foils for TEM analysis were prepared by twin-jet electrolytic polishing from a starting thickness of 90–100μm using a 7 pct perchloric acid ethanol bath under conditions of about 50V for 40min at 243K or below. The specimens were examined in the TEM under 200kV. X-ray fluorescence (XRF) test was conducted on the Beamline 15 U1 of Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF) with excitation energy of 20.5keV.	1
The polished section of specimens for hardness test was loaded by pressure force of 0.5N for 15s after being cleaned with absolute ethanol. Five indentations were made on each specimen to obtain an average. High temperature tensile test was conducted at 1123K with a strain rate of 0.00324s−1. Five specimens for each condition were tested to obtain an average. Oxidation tests were performed at 1173K in air using a KSL-1400X muffle furnace. All specimens were tested simultaneously and weighed after air exposure for 0.5, 1, 5, 10, 25, 50, 100, 200 and 250h. In the same way, we took the average of five specimens for every condition.	0
 shows metallographic photos of specimens with various yttrium concentrations. One can see that grains of the alloys containing yttrium are refined. The grain size decreases with increasing yttrium concentrations (). It is easy for yttrium to form compound with other elements such as P and S. These compounds are in tiny solid particles which can be a barrier to grain growth due to the segregation of these compounds on the grain boundaries.	1
 shows effects of yttrium addition on the microstructure of Ni–16Mo–7Cr–4Fe alloy. There are lots of particles along grain boundaries. For the alloys containing yttrium, the number of coarse particles at grain boundaries increases with increasing yttrium concentration. EDS results of these coarse particles show that there are two phases, i.e. molybdenum-rich (Mo-rich) phase and yttrium-rich (Y-rich) phase (e and f). Yttrium can refine distribution of carbide by providing yttrium carbide as the heterogeneous nucleation sites for MC carbide, and yttrium component has a remarkable influence on the driving force of carbide growth . It can be seen that the morphology of Mo-rich phase changes from coarse cluster to discrete small particle after adding 0.05wt.% yttrium. In addition, a Y-rich phase was observed and the number of Y-rich particles increased with increasing the yttrium concentrations.	0
The conventional TEM and EDX results also show that there is a common phase (Phase A in a) in all the alloys. Phase A is angular and its main composition elements are Mo, Ni and Cr, corresponding to the above mentioned Mo-rich phase. The selected area diffraction patterns (SADPs) of [011] and 12¯3¯ zone axis of phase A are shown in d and e respectively. It is identified as M6C which has a face centered cubic structure. When the concentration of yttrium increases to 0.05wt.%, a new round phase (Phase B in b) appears, the main composition elements of which are Ni and Y. The SADPs of [0001] and 022¯3 of phase B are shown in f and g respectively. In the same way, phase B is identified as Ni17Y2, which has a hexagonal crystal structure with a=0.8320nm, c=0.8042nm and a space group of P63/mmc. The number and size of Ni17Y2 phase increase with enhancing the yttrium concentration, and the shape of Ni17Y2 changes from round to irregular. There are multiphase regions consisting of three phases when the yttrium concentration reaches 0.43wt.%, namely Ni17Y2 phase,M6C phase and γ phase (fcc structural matrix phase). c shows TEM images of Ni17Y2 and M6C. These results are consistent with the results of SEM–EDS. For the alloys with excess yttrium, most of yttrium is consumed to form Ni17Y2 phase. Consequently the amount of yttrium in the solid solution and grain boundaries decreases.  shows XRF pattern from grain boundaries and grain interior of the specimens with various yttrium concentrations. Alloy G05 exhibits the strongest yttrium fluorescence peak at grain boundaries, followed by alloy G12, G21 and G43 (a). However, the yttrium fluorescence peaks collected from grain interior change little with yttrium concentrations (b). Alloy G05 has the highest yttrium concentration at grain boundary and in grain interior. For alloy G05, yttrium distributes mainly in solid solution and grain boundary.	0
Microhardness varies with yttrium concentrations (). The present results indicate that appropriate yttrium addition leads to a remarkable improvement in hardness. Hardness reaches the peak at 0.05wt.% yttrium concentration and then decreases with increasing the yttrium concentration.	0
Yttrium affects the hardness of alloys in a complex way. The improvement can be attributed firstly to the solid-solution strengthening effect of yttrium. The radius of yttrium is 2.27Å, which is much bigger than that of nickel (1.62Å), so yttrium in the matrix has a good effect on solid-solution strengthening. Secondly, appropriate yttrium addition can modify phase morphology changing from the course clusters to discrete small particles which is beneficial to hardness of alloys.  exhibits the fracture appearance of alloy G05 and G00. There are more and smaller dimples in alloy G05 with better toughness. One important reason is that many discrete small particles form in alloy G05, which can improve the nucleation of dimples. Thirdly, the refined grain size is also a main reason. Fourthly, the desulphurization and counteraction other deleterious elements at grain boundaries are very important. Yttrium has a good affinity to many deleterious elements and forms less harmful phase, such as yttrium oxysulfides and yttrium sulfides .  shows that some yttrium-rich particles segregate in the grain boundaries of alloy G05, which is beneficial to improve the strength and hardness of the alloy . Consequently, yttrium addition leads to a remarkable improvement in the hardness of alloy, especially G05. Additionally, tensile properties are also enhanced by proper yttrium addition ().	0
Hardness reaches the peak at 0.05wt.% yttrium concentration and then decreases with increasing the yttrium concentration, the major factor of which is the solid-solution strengthening effect of yttrium. In the alloys with excess yttrium, most of yttrium is consumed to form Ni17Y2 phase. As mentioned above, the amount of Ni17Y2 phase increases with increasing yttrium concentration, and even large amount of multi-precipitated phase regions appear in the form of coarse Ni17Y2 phase surrounded by M6C phase and γ phase. However, yttrium distributes mainly in solid solution and grain boundaries for alloy G05. The solid-solution strengthening effect of alloy G05 is stronger than the alloys containing excess yttrium. Consequently the hardness of G05 is relatively high. Furthermore, the shapes of MC6 phase segregating at grain boundary change from discrete particles to coarse clusters again with further increasing yttrium (), which can decrease the hardness of the alloy. The tensile strength of the alloys also decreases with the further increasing yttrium ().	0
The curves of average mass gain per unit area versus oxidation time for the five alloys at 1173K are presented in a. The static oxidation resistance of Ni–16Mo–7Cr–4Fe alloy is substantially improved by yttrium addition, especially alloy G05. However, excess yttrium additions reduce the oxidation resistance of Ni–16Mo–7Cr–4Fe alloy. The mass of scale spallation per unit area versus oxidation time is plotted in b. Alloy G00 exhibits the most severe spalling, followed by alloy G43, G21 and G12. The spalling oxides are confirmed to be NiO and NiFe2O4 by XRD and SEM–EDS (). Severe spallation of the oxide scale of alloy G05 is not found within 250h and the outer NiO layer was detected clearly in alloy G05 (d).  shows SEM images and EDS analysis of the cross-sections of alloys G00, G05 and G43. The oxide scale of alloy G05 is much thinner and more compact than that of alloy G00. The thick Mo-rich layer was detected in alloys G00 and G43, but not detected in alloy G05. In addition, the internal layer of alloy G05 is the compact Cr–O oxide, which can inhibit the diffusion of O and Mo effectively. However, the compact internal Cr–O layer was not observed clearly in alloys G00 and G43. Thus, in combination with the above results, the beneficial roles of appropriate yttrium addition on the high temperature oxidation resistance of Ni–16Mo–7Cr–4Fe alloy are stated as following. Firstly, appropriate yttrium improves the adhesion of the outer oxidation scale to the substrate. Secondly, appropriate yttrium promotes the formation of the compact Cr–O internal oxide layer and hence inhibits the further oxidation of Ni–16Mo–7Cr–4Fe alloy. Thirdly, appropriate yttrium inhibits molybdenum diffusion signally. Finally, appropriate yttrium can improve the grain boundary strength of NiO layer. Some intergranular cracks appear on the surface of alloy G00. However, crack is not observed on the surface of alloy G05 ().	0
In the alloys containing excess yttrium concentrations, lots of multiphase regions containing coarse Ni17Y2 phase appear. Ni17Y2 phase consumes most of yttrium in the solid solution, which is tied to the stable Ni17Y2 phase. Therefore, it is difficult to form the compact oxide scale and protect the alloy from severe oxidation. Moreover, the compact Cr–O layer is not formed timely and hence Mo can diffuse to the surface of alloy easily. In addition, the interfaces between Ni17Y2 and matrix may supply the diffusion channels for oxygen and oxidizable elements especially Mo. Consequently, the oxide scale of the alloys with excess yttrium is very thick.	0
Microstructure of Ni–16Mo–7Cr–4Fe nickel-based alloy is significantly improved by proper yttrium addition. Proper yttrium can refine grains and improve the distribution of the coarse particles simultaneously. Excess yttrium can also refine grains, nevertheless, the number and size of detrimental Ni17Y2 increase with enhancing concentration of yttrium and the shape of Ni17Y2 changes from round to irregular. When the concentration of yttrium increases to 0.43wt.%, some multi-precipitated phase regions appear in the form of coarse Ni17Y2 precipitates surrounded by M6C phase and γ phase.	0
Mechanical properties of Ni–16Mo–7Cr–4Fe alloy are substantially improved by proper yttrium addition. The alloy containing proper yttrium performs the highest hardness and strength. It is mainly attributed to the solid solution strengthening effect of yttrium. However, hardness and tensile strength decrease with further increasing yttrium concentration because the Ni17Y2 phase consumes most of yttrium in the solid solution.	0
High temperature oxidation resistance of Ni–16Mo–7Cr–4Fe nickel-based alloy is improved by proper yttrium addition. The beneficial effects of yttrium on high temperature oxidation of Ni–16Mo–7Cr–4Fe alloy include: (a) improving adhesion of the outer oxidation scale to the substrate; (b) inhibiting the diffusion of molybdenum to the surface of oxide scale; (c) promoting the formation of the compact Cr–O internal oxide layer and (d) preventing cracks in the surface of oxide scale by improving the strength of grain boundaries.	0
This work is financially supported by  (Grant No. 2014DFG60230), the  (Grant Nos. 51371189 and 51371188), the  (Grant No. 11JC1414900) and the . The authors also wish to thank the BL 15U1 in SSRF for the XRF testing.	0
The normal spectral emissivity of five aeronautical alloys at moderate and high temperature is measured.	0
The effects of oxidation and flame treatment process on surface micromorphology are investigated.	0
The effects of oxidation and flame treatment process on emissivity are investigated.	0
Radiation is an important heat transfer mode for the hot parts of aero-engines, which significantly affects the structure and strength of aircraft parts. To describe the capacity of emitting radiation of a certain material, emissivity is defined by the ratio of the emissive power of the material and blackbody at the same temperature. The emissivity generally varies with wavelength, temperature and surface conditions. Even for the same material, different surface conditions, such as oxidation, contaminate and different surface micromorphology, have considerable effects on it . However, there are limited theories to predict emissivity accurately, especially for the real material surfaces . Therefore, measuring emissivity in a certain material with different surface conditions is significant for high fidelity radiation computation and improving the understanding of radiation heat transfer.	0
Aeronautical alloys are not only widely employed in hot parts of aero-engines but also in nuclear and petroleum industries because of their good performance in resisting oxidization, corrosion and fatigue in high temperature environment. So some researches have already been carried on. Campo investigated the normal and directional emissivity of three kinds of Ni and Co based aeronautical alloys, Inconel 718 (GH169), Rene41 and Haynes 25, on wavelength (2–22 μm), sample temperature (200–650 °C) and emission angle (0–85°). The effects of the following surface conditions, brushed, sandblast, wire-cut EDM and oxidation, on emissivity were taken into consideration . Keller measured the hemispherical emissivity of Inconel 718 in four different surface types from 650 K to 1275 K, and found that the hemispherical emissivity increased with the increase of temperature and oxidation . Greene measured the hemispherical emissivity of Inconel 718 for the as-received sample and oxidized sample . The normal emissivity of two nickel-based superalloys at the melting transition and in the molten state at 684.5 nm was reported .	0
In this paper, the normal emissivity of GH169, K417G, K77, DZ125 and DD5 in the range of 1–15  μm at 400–1200 K has been measured. Almost all radiation is covered in this range, when these alloys are employed. So emissivity acquired in this experiment is applicable. It can be seen that the emissivity of GH169 has been widely studied and the current experiment extents its temperature range. No emissivity data of K417G, K77, DZ125 and DD5 can be found in literature. Thus the experiment results presented in this paper will show the data for the first time. In addition, when these alloys are used in aero-engine, two typical surface conditions, oxidation and heated by flame, are also considered.	0
 shows the composition of each alloy in weight percentage. Alloys are machined into disk samples with the dimension of 30 mm in diameter and 2 mm in thickness and then polished using sandpaper. Then these samples are washed by acetone to clean the surfaces and then dried in the air. After that, some of them are heated in a high-temperature air muffle furnace at the temperature of 900 °C for 10 h then cooled down to the room temperature in the open air. Some are processed in a kerosene flame for 20 min. So we get three kinds of samples with different surface conditions of each alloy: polished, oxidized and flame treatment processed. These samples can be easily distinguished by their appearance. The polished surfaces are silver-white and shiny. The oxidized surfaces are black and rough. The flame treatment processed surfaces are brown. We measure the roughness of these samples using a conventional roughmeter.  shows the average roughness (Ra) of each sample. Seen from their appearance, the oxidized samples have the roughest surfaces and the flame treatment processed samples increase not much in roughness. Then a scanning electron microscope (SEM) is used to observe the detail surface micromorphology of each sample. The images in different magnifications are shown in . It can be seen that the polished surfaces are relatively smooth and clean but some tool marks still exist. The oxidized surfaces are covered by continuous oxide films which consist of many cubic crystals. There are some differences between alloys that the films of K417G, DD5 and DZ125 are more uniform than that of GH169 and K77. The flame treatment process introduces some impurities and defects on the surfaces. And X-ray diffraction (XRD) is performed on oxidized and flame treatment processed surfaces to detect products generated. The patterns are displayed in . Analyzing the position and relative intensity of these peaks, we can see that the products on the oxidized samples are almost the same which are Cr2O3 in a higher proportion and fewer NiCrMnO4. The XRD results also show that oxides quantity in the film of GH169 and K77 are higher than K417G, DD5 and DZ125, which indicates that K417G, DD5 and DZ125 have a better oxidation resistance than GH169 and K77. It agrees with the oxidized rate of these alloys reported in literature . There is no oxide detected on the flame treatment processed surfaces. Since the diffusion flame consumed most oxygen in the air and the flame treatment processing time is not long enough.	0
The normal spectral emissivity of each sample is measured by a high-temperature normal spectral emissivity measurement system, which mainly consists of a FT–IR spectrometer, a sample heating chamber, a blackbody chamber a rotation disk and a vacuum system . The FT–IR spectrometer (Nicolet iS50) rapidly and accurately detects and processes the signals from the sample and blackbody. The heating chamber heats up the sample by a Silicon Nitride plate and the temperature is measured by a S-type thermocouple wire with the diameter of 0.5 mm. Temperature is controlled by a PID device with the accuracy of 1 °C. The blackbody (ISDC, IR-564) is used to calibrate the radiometer. When temperature is stable, the rotation disk rotates to ensure the radiation emitted from sample and blackbody transmits through the same optical path successively. The vacuum system evacuates the chamber to 10−2 Pa to avoid oxidation and the absorption by CO2 and vapor during measuring.	1
Because of the radiation of background, emissivity value can't be obtained by direct division of the radiation signals of the sample and the blackbody. Therefore, a calibration procedure should be done before all measurements. This method involves measuring the output radiation signals of the blackbody at low and high temperatures. A water-cooling system is set at 20 °C to keep temperature of the background. So its radiation can be determined. The uncertainty sources of this system come from the temperature measurement, containing the measurement and the stability of the sample temperature and the blackbody temperature, the blackbody cavity effective emissivity, the none-linearity of FTIR and the noise signal. The uncertainty of the temperature is 0.0121. The blackbody cavity effective emissivity uncertainty is 0.0065 and the uncertainty of FTIR is 0.0043, according to the maximum non-linearity provided by the manufacturer. Hence, the combined uncertainty of this system is 0.0147 and the expended uncertainty is 0.0294 at the 95% confidence level. More details can be found in Ref. .	0
Since surface stress generated during machine process raise emissivity considerably, this effect should be eliminated before measurement . It is also reported that annealing at high temperature is effective to relieve the stress . Therefore, the polished samples were heated for 1 h at 900 °C in vacuum before experiment. The oxidation and flame treatment process have already severed as a relieving step, therefore, their emittance can be measured directly. After all preparations, the emissivity of each sample is measured from 400 K to 1200 K in the interval of 200 K. Every temperature step is kept for 20 min to ensure thermal equilibrium before the FT-IR begins to acquire the sample and blackbody radiation spectrum.	1
The normal emissivity of five aeronautical alloys, GH169, K77, K417G, DD5 and DZ125 is acquired in the wavelength range of 1–15  μm at medium to high temperature (400–1200 K). In addition, the emittance of oxide and flame treatment processed samples in the same ranges is also measured to investigate their effects on radiation properties.	1
 shows the normal spectral emissivity of the polished samples as a function of wavelength at different temperatures. It can be seen that the wavelength and temperature dependence of these alloys are almost the same that the emissivity decreases with increasing wavelength and increases as temperature rise. These trends are well predicted by the electromagnetic wave theory. But the emissivity values among them still have some differences. DZ125 has a relatively lower emissivity than other alloys, while GH169 and K77 have higher values in long wavelengths.	0
The emissivity at different temperatures in three specific wavelengths (2 μm, 8 μm and 14 μm) is shown in . As seen, the value of emissivity is nearly in liner relation with temperature except K77. The emissivity of K77 becomes higher when temperature is beyond 800 K. This is probably caused by oxidation during measuring. Although it is measured almost in a vacuum, there still exists some oxygen reacting with the alloy, which can be proved by some oxides in grey color formed on the surface after measurement. It is also clear that the emissivity value of GH169 increases more with temperature than other alloys.	0
 shows the normal spectral emittance of the oxidized samples as a function of wavelength at different temperatures. As seen, their emittance changes significantly in value and profile that the values become higher and the wavelength dependence become irregular compared with the polished samples. The wavelength dependence trends of oxidized K417G, DZ125 and DD5 are almost the same. The oscillation observed in their short wavelength is due to the interference effect of radiation between the oxide film and the alloy surface . Interference of radiation depends on the thickness of the oxide film and the frequency of incident radiation. The peak shifts to the longer wavelength as the thickness of the oxide film increases. As the growing of the film, the interference effect will disappear when the thickness reaches a certain value that incident radiation will be absorbed completely in the film. Consequently, no radiation approaches the substrate and interferes with radiation reflected from oxide film surface. Therefore, it can be concluded that the oxide film of K77 is the thickest. It also agrees with the fact mentioned above that K417G, DZ125 and DD5 have a better oxidation resistance than GH169 and K77, for they experienced the same oxidized process. The oscillations in long wavelength are related to the absorption bands caused by oxide crystal vibrational transitions. In the band the absorptive index is relatively high, while it decreases sharply on both sides .	0
Metals are high reflection and poor absorption to incident radiation because of an abundance of free electrons so that they are usually low in emissivity, since the absorptivity is equal to emissivity according to the Kirchhoff law. While an oxide film formed on metal, the mechanism of absorption is changed and becomes similar to nonconductors. In infrared, the radiative properties are dominant by the photon excitation of the vibrational energy levels of the solid's crystal lattice . This vibration can produce some electric dipole moment which can interact with electromagnetic wave, triggering strong absorption . This is the main reason that the emittance of these oxidized samples is much higher than polished samples. The other reason is the change of surface micromorphology. The SEM images show the oxide crystals on the film make the surface rougher and more complicated. Roughness average increases significantly, especially for K77 oxide sample. As a result, incident radiation is reflected and absorbed more times between the crystals, leading to the increase of emittance.	0
XRD results reveal that the compositions of the oxide film are almost the same for these alloys, which are Cr2O3 and NiCrMnO4. The results also show Cr2O3 is in higher proportion than NiCrMnO4. This reason is that Cr is more active and has a stronger outward transmitting capacity through grain boundary. In addition, Cr2O3 is more stable than the oxides of other elements in the Ni-Cr alloy systems . The generated Cr2O3 and NiCrMnO4 form a continuous and compact oxide film then will prevent oxygen from further oxidizing alloy.	0
The temperature dependence of emittance in three wavelengths (2 μm, 8 μm and 14 μm) is displayed in . As seen, temperature rise, emittance in these wavelengths increases with the nearly same rate. The difference among samples is very small.	0
 is the spectral normal emittance of the flame treatment processed samples in different temperatures as a function of wavelength. It shows that the emittance increases moderately and the wavelength dependence of these samples varies not too much compared with polished samples, i.e., the emittance decreases as increasing wavelength. It indicates most of the radiation is still emitted from the alloy self. There is no interference effect appeared in short wavelength, which reveals no oxides film formed after the flame treatment process. This is accordance with the XRD results that no oxides peaks are identified. Although the process is conducted in high temperature in the air, oxygen is consumed by the diffusion flame so it can be hardly react with alloys. It is also remarkable that the emittance has a slight increase in long wavelength.	0
The SEM images in  show the surfaces become coarser with some impurities and defects after the flame treatment process. These combustion residual particles such as soot have a higher emissivity than alloy. The roughness average of these surfaces also have slight increased. It is reported that the increase of surface roughness affects the emissivity at longer wavelengths more than at shorter wavelengths . These combined effects lead to the increase of emittance, especially in long wavelength. The temperature dependence of emittance in three wavelengths (2 μm, 8 μm and 14 μm) is displayed in . It is notable that there is a sudden increase of emittance at high temperature. On the one hand, this is due to impurities which may have different temperature dependence and on the other hand oxidation during measurement is also a reason. Although a vacuum atmosphere is made before measuring, there still remains some oxygen. When temperature increases highly, oxidation occurs. This is accordance with the observation that some grey oxide spots are formed on some samples after measurement.	0
In this paper, the normal spectral emissivity of five aeronautical alloys in a wide temperature range (400–1200 K) from near IR to middle IR is measured. It is found these polished alloys all have low emissivity. As theories predict, the emissivity decreases with increasing wavelength and increases as temperature rise. In addition, oxide film formed on samples increase the emissivity significantly because of the change of absorption mechanism and surface micromorphology. The effects of interference and absorption band are observed clearly, which make the wavelength dependence irregular. The flame treatment process also increases the emissivity, especially in long wavelength. This is mainly caused by impurities left on the surface after the process.	0
These surface conditions are typical conditions when these alloys are used in aero-engine, and temperature and wavelength ranges are wide enough to cover their working conditions. Therefore, data acquired in this experiment is practical in relevant industrial applications.	0
Laser remelting process can remarkably reduce the TGO growth rate due to the densified surface layer of topcoat to decrease oxygen diffusion rate.	0
The crack proportion of laser remelted surface has declined by 30% by preheating process owing to the reduction of temperature gradient across the coating.	0
Al2O3 sol-gel dealing on the surface of the laser-remelted surface of the YSZ top coat prepared is also proved a useful way to decrease the TGO growth rate.	0
Thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) are widely applied in gas turbines and jet engines to protect the superalloy components, such as blades and vanes, from the high temperature combustion and harsh oxidizing atmosphere . Currently, TBC systems mainly consist of a ceramic topcoat for thermal insulation, and a metallic bondcoat providing the adhesion between the topcoat and the superalloy substrate . During the high temperature operation, a thin layer of thermally grown oxide (TGO) will generate between the topcoat and bondcoat, composed mainly of Al2O3 and some other oxides, such as chromia ((Cr, Al)2O3), spinel (Ni(Cr, Al)2O4) and nickel oxide (NiO), which are all formed due to the oxygen diffusion through the ceramic topcoat .	0
Due to the mismatching of elastic modulus and thermal expansion coefficients, the growth of TGO will increase the tensile stress at the topcoat-TGO and TGO-bondcoat interfaces, leading to severe cracking and spalling of the ceramic topcoat . State-of-the-art TBC, yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ), has a high oxygen permeability and has been identified as good oxygen ion conductor . Besides, the topcoat fabricated by air plasma spray (APS), contains various defects, such as the typical lamellar stacking microstructure, splat cracks and high volume porosity, which can also accelerate the oxygen diffusion through the topcoat . In order to restrain the TGO growth, several kinds of surface-sealing treatments have been developed to optimize the surface condition of the YSZ topcoat, such as laser remelting, aluminum phosphate sealing, chemical densification and sol-gel process . Among them, laser remelting process has been proven to be effective, because the remelted dense layer at the topcoat surface can reduce the oxygen conduction and therefore slow down the TGO growth . However, a segmented crack network perpendicular to the topcoat surface will generate after remelting and solidification . Propagation of the cracks during the high temperature operation will result in a “shortcut” for oxygen transferring, and finally destroys the oxygen resistance of the remelted layer . Increasing the temperature of the superalloy substrate can reduce the temperature gradient along the TBC system during the APS process and thereby minimize the size of cracks in the ceramic topcoat, which may also be effective during the laser remelting process . Besides, due to the low oxygen conductivity and good high temperature stability, Al2O3 has been identified as a potential protecting layer on TBCs to modify the surface microstructure and provide the oxygen resistance . Effect of Al2O3 on the microstructure and oxidization behavior of YSZ coatings has been studied . However, researches are still lacking about minimizing the concentration and size of cracks in the laser remelted layer by Al2O3 modification.	0
In the present research, preheating of the substrate was employed to control the cracks in the laser remelting layer, and a sol-gel process was also conducted to generate a thin film of Al2O3 on the surface of the laser remelting layer to cover the cracks. Microstructure and oxidization behavior of these modified specimens were investigated. Effect of these two processes on the TGO growth was also discussed.	0
A nickel-based superalloy (Inconel, GH 4169, CISRI, Beijing, China) in the dimension of 10×11×5mm was selected as the substrate. Ni-25Cr-7Al-1Y powders with a particle size between 15μm to 45μm (BGRIMN, Beijing, China) and 7wt.% Y2O3 stabilized ZrO2 powder with a particle size between 75μm to 125μm (BGRIMN, Beijing, China) were respectively used as the raw materials for bondcoat and topcoat. The bondcoat was deposited by high velocity oxy-fuel spraying (HVOF, K2, GTV, Germany) and the topcoat was prepared by air plasma spraying (APS, F6, GTV, Germany). Specific parameters of the HVOF and APS processes are shown in . The TBC specimens were then laser remelted by a pulsed Nd: YAG laser (HYK-200, Hairun Creater, Beijing, China) with 1mm diameter standard circular pulses. The wavelength was 1064nm and the mean power was 80W. The scanning speed was 12mm/s and the overlap of the pulses was 40%.	1
Preheating laser remelting was applied to control the cracking of the topcoat after laser remelting. The specimens were preheated for 20min in an electric furnace (CMF 1100, MTI, Hefei, China) holding at 600°C. After dwelling, the specimens were immediately laser remelted with the same parameters mentioned above. On the other hand, Al2O3 coat was also adopted by sol-gel method on the surface of laser remelted specimens to repair the cracks. 20wt.% acidic Al2O3 sol (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent, Beijing, China) was coated on the surface of the specimens by a spin coater (pw-4a, Chemat Technology, Shanghai, China). Then the specimens were heat treated at 600°C for 5h with a heat rate of 5°C/min to remove the organics. Finally, the specimens were sintered at 1000°C for 8h to form the dense layer of Al2O3. The laser remelting processes applied in the present research are summarized in .	1
In order to investigate the TGO growth in the specimens treated by different laser remelting processes, the specimens were furnace aged in air at 1000°C for 100h (CWF1200, Carbolite, Derbyshire, UK). Then the TGO layer was observed on the cross section of the specimens by SEM (Mira3 LHM, TESCAN, Brno, Czechia) and the thickness of them was also measured from the back scattered electron (BSE) images (JSM 7001F, JEOL, Tokyo, Japan). Finally, the TGO growth rate was calculated by the TGO thickness and the oxidation time.	1
 shows the surface images of as-sprayed APS and laser remelted coating, respectively. The surface of laser remelted coating appeared to be smoother than that of APS coating. Meanwhile, some laser spots residual are remained on the surface after the laser remelting process. Furthermore, SEM images of the surface of the APS and the laser remelted coatings are shown in . Specifically, as-sprayed coatings have a rough surface with melted zone, unmelted particles, cracks and pores. Although YSZ is a good solid electrolyte for oxygen ion conduction at high temperature, the defects will further enhance the oxygen conduction through the coating. Instead, the surface of the laser remelted coatings is much smoother and denser. Most of the pores are eliminated by the remelting. However, some vertical cracks generated during the cooling, which are mainly caused by the rapid solidification and large thermal gradient along the coating . Furthermore,  shows the cross section microstructure of the laser remelted coatings. A dense remelted layer formed at the surface of the coating in contrast to the defective and porous unmelted part beneath.	0
After 100h oxidation at 1000°C, TGO of different thickness have formed at the topcoat and bondcoat interface for both coatings with and without laser remelting.  shows the BSE images of their cross sections. Clearly, TGO in the non-remelted specimens is thicker than that of laser remelted ones, confirming that laser remelting can restrain the TGO growth rate. It should be noticed that the TGO thickness is not uniform. This is mainly affected by two factors; the one is the lamellar structure of the APS coating and the random cracks, voids and pores and the other is the roughness of the bond coat surface. These random distributed defects will lead to the variation of oxygen diffusion and non-uniform TGO growth. The rough bond coat surface with convex and concave also induces a non-uniform TGO thickness layer .	0
In order to accurately evaluate the TGO growth, we defined a specific TGO thickness (δ) as the ratio of the cross section area and the length of the TGO layer, as shown in . The measurement of the area of TGO layer was conducted using the Photoshop software while the length of TGO was obtained by AutoCAD at the same place in the BSE image. For each specimen, the area and length of the TGO were measured at 10 different places. Then the average value of the TGO thickness was calculated and is shown in .	0
Specifically, the TGO thickness of non-remelted and laser remelted specimens are 5.03±1.17μm and 4.34±0.73μm. The TGO growth rate calculated by the TGO thickness and time are respectively 0.0503±0.0117μm/h and 0.0434±0.0073μm/h for non-remelted and laser remelted specimens, which are shown in . A 14% reduction of the TGO growth rate is achieved by the laser remelting process, indicating that the laser remelted dense layer is beneficial to the oxygen resistance of the YSZ topcoat. However, as mentioned above, the vertical cracks in the dense remelted layer, which are generated by the rapid solidification and large thermal gradient, may limit the oxygen resistance or even cause the damage of the layer .	0
To control the cracking of the dense remelted layer, preheating was applied. As shown in , the surface of preheating laser remelted specimen seems to be even smoother than that of specimen without preheating. SEM images of the surface of laser-remelted specimens with and without preheating are shown in . It can be observed that the cracks on the surface of preheated specimens are clearly less than that of specimens without preheating. Furthermore, the crack proportion of the surface can be quantitatively evaluated using the surface image analysis from SEM images. As shown in , the area of all the cracks on the surface can be selected by Photoshop software and the crack proportion can be calculated according to the pixels. The evaluation and calculation were applied at five different section for each specimen which is shown in . As summarized in , crack proportions on the surface of laser remelted specimens with and without preheating are 4.34±0.43% and 6.46±0.39%, respectively. This indicates that preheating is an effective way to reduce the crack proportion on the remelted layer, which may lead to better oxygen resistance.	0
After 100h oxidization at 1000°C, the thickness and the growth rate of the TGO could be calculated from the SEM images of the cross section of the preheating laser remelted specimen (c). As shown in  and listed in , the TGO thickness in preheating lase remelted specimen is 3.7±0.72μm and the TGO growth rate is 0.0370±0.0072μm/h, respectively, which are about 15% lower than the laser remelted specimen without preheating, and about 26% lower than the as-sprayed coating. Clearly, preheating can improve the effect of laser remelting process in restraining the TGO growth.	0
In present study, effect of Al2O3 sol-gel repairing laser remelting is also investigated. In the surface image of sol-gel repairing laser remelted specimen (), the laser spots disappeared from due to a cover of new Al2O3 coating. As shown in a the SEM image of the surface of the Al2O3 sol-gel repairing laser remelted specimen reveals that the cracks on the dense remelted layer are mainly sealed by a thin film, although there are still some small cracks remained due to the shrinkage of the gel during densification. EDX measurement results (b,d) indicate the composition of film is alumina and the Al2O3 infiltrates into the cracks. However, XRD test could not identify the α-Al2O3 phase (the thermodynamically stable phase above 1000°C) on the surface since the amount of Al2O3 is too small. Since Al2O3 is an oxygen barrier material restraining the oxygen diffusion across the coating, low TGO growth rate can be expected in Al2O3 sol-gel repairing laser remelted specimens .	0
After high temperature oxidation test, the TGO layer in the Al2O3 sol-gel repairing laser remelted specimen is even thinner (shown in d), for which the TGO thickness is 3.8±1.00μm and the TGO growth rate is 0.0380±0.0100μm/h, respectively. Comparing with as-sprayed coating, the reduction of TGO growth rate is about 24% lower, which is similar with that of preheating laser remelting process.	0
In summary, TGO growth rate of laser remelted, preheating laser remelted and sol-gel repairing laser remelted specimens have been obviously reduced in comparison to as-sprayed APS coatings. It is well known that the oxygen transportation from the atmosphere to the topcoat-bondcoat interface through the YSZ coating has two major mechanisms. One is the oxygen diffusion in the gas phase via the interconnected cracks, pores and voids; the other one is the oxygen ion migration and conduction by means of a discrete hopping process through the YSZ lattice . In the present research, the biggest TGO growth rate for as-sprayed coating is owing to both of the two mechanisms. For laser remelted specimen, the pores are eliminated and the crack concentration and size are also controlled. Thus, the gas phase diffusion is retarded and the TGO growth rate is smaller than that of as-sprayed coating. For preheating laser remelted specimen, the crack concentration in the dense remelted layer is reduced by about 30%, therefore the gas phase diffusion is further retarded and the TGO growth rate is even smaller. For sol-gel repairing laser remelted coating system, the YSZ grains are covered by the oxygen barrier Al2O3 film and the cracks are also partly sealed. Therefore, both oxygen transportation mechanisms are retarded. The TGO growth rate is smaller than that of the laser remelted specimen.	0
Comparing with the as-sprayed coating, the TGO thickness (after 100h at 1000°C) reduction of laser remelted, preheating laser remelted and sol-gel repairing laser remelted specimens are 13%, 26% and 24% respectively. These results are compatible with some previous researches, such as 13% (100h at 1000°C) after conventional Al2O3 covering , 28% (100h at 1100°C) after nanostructured Al2O3/YSZ compositing  and 26% (240h at 1200°C) after laser remelting . It should be noticed that the TGO thickness reduction (26%) of laser remelted coating after 240h oxidation at 1200°C is twice more than that only laser remelted (13%) in the present research. The difference may be caused by the oxidation temperature and time.	0
In order to restrain the TGO growth in TBCs, three different methods based on laser remelting process were employed to YSZ/NiCrAlY TBCs. The TGO thickness and growth rate in the specimens were evaluated discussed. Laser remelting can reduce the TGO growth rate by about 13%. Preheating laser remelting can reduce the surface crack proportion generated during the laser remelting, thereby further decreases the TGO growth rate decreased by about 26%. Moreover, Al2O3 film can cover the surface of YSZ coating and seal the cracks. Therefore, Al2O3 sol-gel repairing laser remelting can decrease the TGO growth rate by 24%. These results provide new perspectives to restrain the TGO growth in YSZ/NiCrAlY thermal barrier coatings.	0
This research is supported by  (No. 51072088 and 51272120).	0
Multi-bead laser powder deposition (LPD) is a laser surfacing process in which a 3-D object can be fabricated by melting and subsequent solidification of additive powder injected into a moving molten pool formed by the laser beam. This process produces a deposit that has superior properties, a metallurgical bond with minimal mixing (dilution) of the substrate. LPD has been demonstrated to be an effective repair technology for Ni-based superalloy single crystal (SX) and directionally solidified (DS) turbine blades because of its ability to produce accurately controlled weld metal deposition and low distortion with a lower heat input, as shown in the work by So et al. (1996), Kathuria (2000), and Peters and Jahnen (2002). The challenge of LPD is to achieve, in the repair zone, a crack-free directional solidification structure identical to the substrate (Tin et al., 2000; Klingbeil et al., 2002; Lee et al., 2006). The multi-bead deposition undergoes cyclic heating and cooling by the concentrated laser beam, which makes the deposition vulnerable to thermal stresses that cause the hot cracks. Loss of directional growth, or formation of “stray grains”, deteriorates creep, thermomechanical fatigue, and oxidation resistance of superalloys. In LPD-repaired directionally solidified turbine blades, stray grains nucleate heterogeneously with random orientations and hence form high angle boundaries (HABs) with the matrix. The HABs are favorable locations for crack initiation. A positive correlation between stray grains and cracking in the deposit has been identified by Liu and DuPont (2004), Vitek (2005), and Li (2006).	0
As has been shown by Hunt (1984), Lipton et al. (1984), and Cockcroft et al. (1994), the mechanism of stray grain formation is equiaxed grains nucleation and growth ahead of the moving solidification interface when there is a region of undercooled liquid. This can lead to the transition from a columnar to an equiaxed dendritic morphology, referred to as CET (columnar to equiaxed transition). Hunt (1984) was the first to develop an analytical model describing the basic conditions for CET in an alloy. Gäumann et al. (2001), following Hunt, derived a criterion for CET of Ni-based superalloys under the conditions of laser treatment, which was a function of temperature gradient (G) and interface velocity (V). It was demonstrated that a fully columnar structure can be obtained when the ratio Gn/V is above a critical value (n is a material-dependent constant). This ratio is the slope of the microstructure selection curve for the superalloy, showing the expected solidification morphology as a function of G and V. Using this criterion, the microstructure was predicted in correlation with molten pool geometry, substrate orientation and process conditions of laser surface melting by Liu and DuPont (2004, 2005). A flat bottomed molten pool with a weld-toe angle smaller than 45° was suggested as the preferred deposit shape for stray grain prevention. Similarly, stray grain formation, as a function of composition and process conditions, was examined by Rappaz et al. (1989), Rappaz et al. (1990a) and Vitek (2005). However, these findings are limited to the welding of single-crystal superalloys with single-bead, deep penetration welds. For multi-bead deposits produced with optimized single-bead parameters, stray grains are still found in the second and upper layers.	0
The defect formation in the multi-bead LPD process, specifically solidification cracking in deposit governed by shrinkage thermal stresses and stray grains associated with temperature gradient, is strongly dependent on the in-process thermal conditions, including the transient temperature field, with temperature gradient as a major parameter for description of the field. Therefore, successful application of the multi-bead LPD process to the repair of turbine blade requires a full understanding of the thermal field. However, the LPD process inherently includes multi-scale, highly nonlinear, and nonequilibrium transport phenomena because of nonuniform and rapid heat flow caused by laser and material interaction.	0
Among the reported modeling approaches of the 3-D multi-bead LPD process, the geometry of the deposited materials is limited to either a thin wall or a rectangular cross section with beads deposited on top of each other, as in the work of Alimardani et al. (2007) and Peyre et al. (2008). The influence of irregular bead shapes and realistic bead sequencing on thermal fields is not considered. Another limitation of the current thermal models is that they consider only the continuous-wave laser heating, not the pulsed laser heating. The pulsed laser deposition offers a number of advantages due to its significantly lowered heat input to the workpiece and therefore much narrower heat-affected zone, smaller dilution, and smaller tendency to form cracks (Kathuria, 2000; Sun et al., 2005). Moreover, the laser power-off period between two pulses allows the molten pool to solidify; therefore, a higher cooling rate results in a finer microstructure compared with the case using continuous laser. However, the multi-bead PLPD thermomechanical model for pulsed laser is currently not available.	0
In this paper, a 3-D finite element model, including parameters of overlapping and bead geometry, has been developed to simulate the multi-bead PLPD process applied to the Ni-based SX turbine blade repair, using the ANSYS code and element re-activation technology. The achieved transient temperature gradient results, affected by deposition pattern and sequence, bead geometry and overlapping, are helpful in clarifying the distributions of thermal field and the tendency of stray grain formation. Further, cracking and stray grain formations are correlated with transient thermal stresses. The measurement of actual temperature profiles is conducted to validate the developed multi-bead PLPD model.	0
During the multi-bead pulsed laser powder deposition (PLPD) process (shown in Fig. 1), when a material in powder form is injected into the laser beam within the pulsed laser power-on period, it is heated instantly. Meanwhile, the laser beam locally and quickly heats the substrate to develop a molten pool. Thereafter, the surface tension gradient drives the fluid flow within the molten pool so that the deposited powder particles are mixed rapidly. Once the power-off period of the laser pulse arrives, the molten pool cools down and the alloy solidifies rapidly. Longitudinal overlapping of a series of deposits produces a continuous bead; transverse overlapping of beads produces a layer; stacking of layers produces a 3-D object made of deposit. Therefore, the multi-bead PLPD process involves multi-physics phenomena and their interactions, such as heat absorption by powder, formation of molten pool, heat conduction, molten pool dynamics, rapid solidification of molten pool, and sequential overlapping of molten pools.	0
It is observed that the laser intensity used by multi-bead PLPD works in the “melt-in” mode instead of the “keyhole” mode. In the melt-in mode, the material evaporation can be ignored as has been done by Alimardani et al. (2007). Experimental evidence shows that compared with continuous laser, the lower heat input of the pulsed laser beam generates negligible baseplate penetration. A more detailed description of bead shapes and baseplate penetration is given by Mahapatra and Li (2008). Therefore, the current simulation of the multi-bead PLPD process focuses on the heating and cooling of predetermined beads from the melting temperature. Cross-sectional and longitudinal overlapping effects make the simulation more realistic. Additionally, the irregular bead volumes are automatically generated based on the preset parameters of bead geometry and overlapping, and identified as the heat source when the pulsed laser beam scans the multi-beads. The bead shapes in the model are approximated using arc sections (shown in Fig. 2b) to conform to experimentally determined bead shapes (shown in Fig. 10a).	0
To simplify the modeling of the multi-bead PLPD process, the bead geometry obtained by experimental measurement is used as the prototype of the FE model. This approach has the advantage of not having to solve the fluid dynamics of laser-material interactions, although the effect of fluid dynamics can be estimated by the bead shape (Elcoatea et al., 2005; Dong and Wei, 2006; Deng and Murakawa, 2008). Besides determined by process parameters, the bead shape, as the final product, is also a function of thermal conditions, because it reflects the interactions of multi-phenomena in the multi-bead PLPD process. With a predefined bead geometry, the effect of heat absorption of molten pool and baseplate, the conductive and convective heat transfer in the liquid molten pool, the interaction of pulsed laser beam with the molten-pool surface and the laser attenuation are all estimated in this PLPD model.	0
In ANSYS thermomechanical analysis, the thermal–structural coupled finite element matrix equation derived from the stress equation of motion and the heat conservation equation coupled by the thermoelastic constitutive equations is as follows (ANSYS, 2009):where [M] is the element mass matrix, [C] is the element structural damping matrix, [K] is the element stiffness matrix, {u} is the displacement vector, {F} is the sum of the element nodal force, [Ct] is the element specific heat matrix, [Kt] is the element diffusion conductivity matrix, {T} is the temperature vector, {Q} is the sum of the element heat generation load and element convection surface heat flow vectors, [Kut] is the element thermoelastic stiffness matrix [Kut]=−∫vol[B]T{β}{∇{N}T}d{vol}, [B] is the strain-displacement matrix, and [Ctu] is the element thermoelastic damping matrix ([Ctu]=−To[Ktu]T, To is the absolute reference temperature).	0
Initial and boundary conditions applied to the meshed finite elements except the molten pool that is being deposited are:where Te is the environmental temperature, qc is the convective heat flux vector, η is the unit outward normal vector, hf is the film coefficient, and Ts is the temperature at the exposed surfaces. The boundary conditions applied to the molten pool during the heating and cooling periods are explained in Section 2.3.	0
Besides the heat conduction in solid-state beads and baseplate, heat transfer on the exposed surfaces is also included in simulation as a boundary condition. Due to the bead overlap, the convective heat transfer on the partially overlapped surfaces will be removed once the current deposition covers these surfaces according to the multi-bead format and deposition time sequence.	0
Based on the above assumptions, a 3-D 10-bead and 4-layer FE model (using element Solid227 type) has been built using ANSYS, illustrated in Fig. 2a, in which the sequence of deposition is marked by the bead number. The baseplate has a dimension of 33.7mm×24.5mm×1.0mm. Four parameters are defined to identify the cross-sectional bead geometry, which are bead width (w), root angle (α), bead height (h) and bead area (A), shown in Fig. 2b. Among these four bead geometry parameters, only two parameters are independent. From measurements on actual samples made by the multi-bead PLPD process, the bead angle and bead height are identified as 38° and 0.28mm, respectively. Ten (10) deposition spots are deposited by 10 laser pulses to form a bead with a 12.7mm total length. In multi-bead PLPD simulation, the 3-D 10-node tetrahedral thermal solid element and the element re-activation technology are employed to perform this 3-D thermomechanical analysis. The finite elements in the molten pool being deposited are activated as the laser moves to the position. As the laser moves to the next position, a new molten pool volume is activated.	0
The experimental multi-bead PLPD test was conducted using IN625 powder deposited on a directionally solidified superalloy plate with chemical compositions similar to IN738. The laser direction is parallel to the crystal growth direction of the substrate. Listed in Tables 1 and 2 are temperature-dependent thermal properties of IN625 and IN738. IN625 has a melting range of 1290–1350°C, and 1320°C has been used in the model as the melting temperature. The FE simulation is conducted under a constant environmental temperature of 22.4°C. The pulsed laser has a 3kW (Pt) power, an 8ms duration (td) and a 0.5s period (tp) with a scanning speed of 1mm/s. The pulsed spots have a 50% longitudinal overlap. The lateral overlap between beads is 25%.	0
For each laser pulse cycle, the total laser power (Pt) is divided into three parts (Fig. 3): (1) laser power used for heating (Ph); (2) laser power used for melting the deposit powder (Pm); and (3) laser power dissipated to the environment (Pd). The heating of pulsed laser is applied to the molten pool. The power of melting can be calculated by CρV(Tm−Te)/td, where V is the volume of deposition of each pulse and is experimentally determined by quantitative metallography. The laser dissipation is difficult to be estimated and strongly dependent on the surrounding conditions (laser radiation effect) and the absorbability of baseplate and deposited materials. The laser heating power Ph has been selected as the unknown parameter. During simulation, the Ph value is adjusted until the temperature predicted by the FE model agrees well with experimental temperature data. For the current device setup, Ph/Pt=0.1 is used as an initial estimation for the iteration.	0
As indicated earlier, the fluid dynamics and solidification process of the molten pool are estimated through the experimentally pre-determined deposition geometry. A two-step strategy is applied to simulate the deposition of powder material during a single laser pulse, shown in Fig. 4. It is assumed that the deposition of a single laser pulse has a “laminate layer” deposition structure, and the geometry of each laminate varies with the pre-determined deposition shape. This laminated application of deposit as a modeling strategy was first used by Alimardani et al. (2007) in their model of multilayer laser deposition. The following describes how the simulation of a full period of laser pulse is performed, e.g. the jth pulse deposition.	0
The ith layer of the jth pulse deposition (the current laminate of deposition as indicated in Fig. 4) is formed by the new melted powder during the time interval of (j−1)/f+(i−1)×td/N and (j−1)/f+i×td/N, where i and j are the current deposition layer number and laser pulse number, N is the total layer number for each pulse deposition, and f is the laser pulse frequency. At the first step, the current laminate layer deposition is activated in FE simulation and has an initial melting temperature (Tm) at the time of (j−1)/f+(i−1)×td/N. Meanwhile, a new heat flux (Ph/Ae, where Ae is total exposed surface area of the current laminated layer and previous pulse depositions), is applied to the exposed surfaces of the current layer deposition and previous pulse depositions at the second step. Since the formation of the current layer deposition covers the entire exposed surface of previous layer depositions and the partial exposed surface of previous pulse depositions, the heat flux of pulsed laser on those covered surfaces is removed. Then, a transient thermal analysis is conducted for all the activated depositions for the time interval of (j−1)/f+(i−1)×td/N and (j−1)/f+i×td/N. When the analysis of the Nth layer of the jth pulse deposition is finished, the applied heat flux is removed for cooling during the pulsed laser power-off time interval of (j−1)/f+td and j/f. In this way, a full cycle of one laser pulse deposition is modeled, and the same procedure is repeated for the deposition by the next laser pulse.	0
To verify the multi-bead PLPD FE model and simulation results, four thermocouples were resistance spot-welded at various positions, near the deposition area, on the base material specimen. A photograph of the deposition specimen (Fig. 5a) shows the positions of thermocouples labeled from 1 to 4. Temperature profiles from the four thermocouples were recorded and compared with those from numerical simulation of the same deposition sequence, bead geometry, and process parameters. The parameters of the pulsed laser power source was 3kW amplitude, 8ms duration, and 2Hz frequency. The multi-bead PLPD process was conducted with a scanning speed of 1mm/s, 25% cross-sectional and 50% longitudinal overlapping, to make a 10-bead 4-layer buildup, following a layer-by-layer deposition sequence. The number of beads in each layer has the sequence of 4-3-2-1, and each bead is formed by depositions of 10 laser pulses.	0
The developed model was used to simulate the deposition process conducted with the experimental conditions outlined above. Results are presented in Fig. 5b–e. The measured temperature curves exhibit an increasing trend, with temperature peaks appearing with a periodicity of 9s. This periodicity corresponds to the time for depositing a bead, and moving back from the end position of the bead to the start position of next bead. The smaller fluctuations of temperature during a peak correspond to the pulsed laser power on-and-off during bead deposition. By comparison, the developed multi-bead PLPD model correctly predicts the thermal cycle peak for each bead, as well as the general trends of temperature field generated by the moving pulsed laser. The smaller fluctuations in temperature during a peak are also predicted by the model, although the effect is more clearly seen at thermocouples No. 3 and No. 4, which are closer to the deposits.	0
The verified thermal model was used to simulate the temperature fields for multi-pass pulsed laser deposition. As an example, the simulation results of the 55th pulse deposition at t=45.75s, which was the 5th pulse on the 2nd bead of the 2nd layer, have been shown in Fig. 6a–d. In Fig. 6a and b, it can be seen that heat dissipates from the current deposition to the surrounding prior depositions and baseplate. Immediately following the pulse, the bead peak temperature rapidly drops to below the melting temperature. Since the conductive heat transfer was much more efficient than the convective heat transfer in solid, the top of current deposition maintains a higher temperature during the entire cooling process. Different from the temperature distribution, the temperature gradient shows a higher level on the boundaries of the current deposition (Fig. 6c). The maximum temperature gradient exists at the interface between depositions and baseplate due to their dissimilar thermal properties (Fig. 6d).	0
Most cracking and stray grains have been experimentally observed to start from the bead boundaries, especially near the “weld toes”, where two beads meet as shown by Li (2006). Twenty (20) critical weld toe positions on bead boundaries have been identified and numbered in the model, shown in the inset of Fig. 6e. The thermal cycles for these critical positions are chosen to present the evolutions of temperature and gradient fields. The thermal history of position 3 (P3) is shown as an example. Due to reheating of the same position during the multi-bead PLPD, four temperature peaks are found in Fig. 6e. The first two peaks have amplitudes near the melting temperature. These peaks correspond to the time when the laser heat source covers P3 while depositing the 2nd and 3rd beads. The last two peaks have amplitudes lower than the melting temperature. These peaks correspond to the time when the laser heat source moves right above P3 while depositing the 2nd beads on the 2nd and 3rd layers. Similar trends are found in the temperature gradient history of P3 (Fig. 6f). The amplitudes of temperature gradient peaks decrease as a function of time, during which the laser heat source moves further away from point P3. Temperature and temperature gradient histories on other positions share similar evolution trends, but are different in the number and amplitude of peaks. The location of peaks on the time scale depends on the conditions of reheating and relative distance between the moving laser heat source and the point of interest.	0
Based on the above simulation results and analysis, the values of temperature gradient peaks for all critical positions have been extracted and compared in figure. The positions along the peripheral area of the deposition, Points 1, 5, 9, 12, 15, 16, 17, and 18, tend to have higher thermal gradients. For these positions, those at top layers tend to have increased thermal gradients, comparing Points 17 and 18 to Points 1 and 5. The interior positions of the deposition have lower thermal gradients. In particular, Points 2, 3, 8, and 11 have the lowest thermal gradients.	0
Cracking is observed to be closely related with stray grain formation, as the formation of stray grains removes the desirable single-crystal microstructure and, furthermore, the resultant grain boundaries act as easy paths for crack propagation (David et al., 1997; Vitek et al., 1997, 2003). These cracks are most likely to happen along the large-angle grain boundaries, which are between the stray grain and the matrix (i.e., 〈100〉 direction) grains. The formation of stray grains was theoretically analyzed based on the constitutional supercooling and nucleation theories. The “columnar to equiaxed transition” (CET) theory has been proposed to predict the formation of equiaxed dendrite. According to the CET theory, the volume fraction of equiaxed dendrite (the probability of the occurrence of stray grains) ahead of the columnar front (f) can be expressed by Gäumann et al. (2001):where N0 is the nuclei density, both a and n are material constants, G is the temperature gradient, and V is the velocity of the solid–liquid interface. According to this theory, fully equiaxed growth occurs if f is greater than 0.49 (Hunt, 1984). For nickel-based superalloy CMSX-4, values for those constants were found to be a=1.25×106(K3.4s/m), n=3.4 and N0=2×1015(m−3) (Gäumann et al., 2001). V is considered to be equal to the rate of advance of the isotherms Viso. The normal velocity of the liquidus isotherm is linked geometrically to the heat source velocity, Vb, by the angle between the solidification front normal and the beam direction, θ, as shown by Gäumann et al. (1999, 2001):	0
The dendrite tip velocity Vhkl, where [hkl] represents the growth direction, is given by the following relationship (Rappaz et al., 1990b):where ψ is the angle between normal to the solidification front and the dendrite trunk axis defined by [hkl].	0
In the steady-state multi-bead PLPD process, for the same deposition parameters, the weld-pool shape can be considered as constant. Under the condition of invariable weld-pool shape, V is fixed with constant Vb, θ and ψ. Thus, the tendency of stray grain formation can be estimated by temperature gradient, G. A greater G leads to a smaller volume fraction of equiaxed dendriteis, f, and therefore prevents the formation of the stray grains for a given bead shape.	0
The simulated results of temperature gradient can be used to predict the possibility of stray grain formation. For beads on the first layer, stray grains should be more likely to occur based on the lower thermal gradient levels. However, because the ψ angle between the solidification front and the dendrite trunk axis is very small for the flat-bottomed first layer beads, the stray grain formation tendency is low. Microstructural observations of the first layer have confirmed this prediction (Fig. 7b). The subsequent layers, where the weld bead shape is more complicated, the lower thermal gradient locations should have a greater tendency for stray grain formation. This prediction is confirmed by microstructural observations. In Fig. 10, the stray grains first occur in the deposition of the 3rd bead on the second layer (Position 8 as defined in the inset of figure). Based on the simulation results (figure), the lower thermal gradients of P8, P11 and P12, compared with other locations of the same type on the same or higher layers, are predicted to have a greater likelihood for stray grain formation. This result is consistent with the understanding that a greater temperature gradient results in a higher thermal stress, but that a greater temperature gradient results in a lower tendency for stray grain.	0
The driving force for crack formation is the severe thermal stresses that have developed upon solidification of the weld beads. Corresponding to the 3-D temperature gradient simulation results, distributions of thermal stress have been calculated (Fig. 8). Thermal stresses concentrate on the interface between the first layer deposition and the baseplate, caused by the temperature gradient and material mismatch (Fig. 8a), which is similar to that of temperature gradient (Fig. 6d). The positions along the peripheral area of the deposition, Points 1, 5, 9, 12, 17, and 18, tend to have higher thermal stresses. The interior positions of the deposition generally have lower thermal gradients. However, interior locations can have high thermal stresses, such as near Points 10 and 20.	0
Since the crack susceptibility depends on both a susceptible microstructure (stray grains) and driving force (thermal stresses), both factors are analyzed in the following. When the thermal gradient and von Mises stress are plotted for the multibead deposit (Fig. 9), the location of the critical points in the stress-thermal gradient space predicts the tendency for cracking. The points that are located in the left of the figure should favor for stray grain formation. Observation shows stray grains at P8, P11, and P20. Therefore, a normalized thermal gradient of 0.57 can be used as a criterion for stray grain formation. The points that are located in the upper region of the figure favor greater von Mises stresses. Since the superalloy has a yield strength σY of approximately 1000MPa near the melting point, von Mises stress that equals 2σY would be sufficient to permanently deform the alloy. Therefore, a normalized von Mises stress of 0.15 can be used as a criterion for crack formation. Considering both the stray grain and stress conditions, P11, and P20 are predicted to be the locations for crack formation, and P8 to be the likely location for crack formation, because the stress level at P8 is lower.	0
In depositions described in Section 3.1, microcracks are observed at P8, P11, and P20. In Fig. 10b, microcracks are shown to have initiated and propagated along the stray grain boundaries into the bead. This experimental observation agrees well with the simulation predictions. That no cracks are observed in other locations that have even higher stress levels seems to indicate the relative importance of the stress and microstructure conditions for crack formation. The formation of cracks is firstly dependent on the stray grain formation as a necessary condition. The formation of cracks is secondly dependent on the shrinkage thermal stress as a sufficient condition.	0
A 3-D dynamic numerical model has been successfully built to simulate the multi-bead PLPD process and perform the thermomechanical analysis.	0
Based on the predicted thermal results, maximum temperature gradients are found on the boundaries of beads. Multi peaks of temperature and temperature gradient with different amplitudes occur in their profiles, depending on the location and deposition sequence.	0
The correlation of temperature gradient and von Mises stress has given a critical value range and location in the deposit, in which the formation of stray grains and cracks is most likely to occur.	0
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support by the Welding Research Council (WRC) and American Welding Society (AWS).	0
Creation of k〈112〉 partials from native a/2〈110〉 dislocations is clarified.	0
All possible dislocation pairs among m〈110〉 and n〈112〉 are examined.	0
Formation mechanisms of anti-phase boundaries and stacking faults are clarified.	0
Criterion for annihilation of anti-phase boundaries is established.	0
Ni-based superalloys are commonly used for high temperature applications, e.g., typically for blades and vanes of turbine engines, because of their excellent creep resistance and high temperature strength . Their microstructure is composed of an ordered L12-structured γ′ phase in cuboidal shapes embedded in a continuous disordered FCC γ phase matrix . Due to its ordered structure, the γ′ phase offers much greater resistance to dislocation movement, rendering the superalloys high strength at elevated temperatures . However, under more severe conditions, dislocations are still able to move from the γ phase matrix into the γ′ phase domains .	0
The Burgers vector of full dislocations in FCC γ phase is bγ = a/2〈110〉, which is the full lattice vector along 〈110〉. For the L12 ordered γ′ phase, the full lattice vector along 〈110〉 is bγ′ = a〈110〉, twice in magnitude of that of the Burgers vector of the native dislocation in the γ phase. In this regard, bγ′ = a〈110〉 can be considered a “super-dislocation” of the γ′ phase and its energy state is prohibitively high, thus rarely exists in isolation. This implies that the conceptual full “super-dislocation” in the γ′ phase always exist in split partial forms, creating various types of planar defects.  shows the (111) plane of the L12 structure and its ABC stacking order. The native full dislocation in FCC is denoted b1 in the figure. The shortest lattice vector in the L12 structure along 〈110〉 is b = a〈110〉 (denoted b in the figure), which is twice as large as b1. This implies that a b = a/2〈110〉 dislocation moving from the γ phase into the γ′ phase only acts like a partial dislocation along 〈110〉 , creating an anti-phase boundary (APB) along {111} in the γ′ phase, as indicated by b1 in . It is also clear in the figure that there are three equivalent variants of APB, indicated as b1′ and b1″ in addition to b1. They are produced by b = a/2〈110〉 dislocations with co-planar Burgers vectors. It is also apparent that b1′ = b1 + b1″.	0
The creation of APB incurs an energy increase, or barrier, to the process . To reduce this energy barrier, dislocation pairs of the same Burgers vector are required, so that the APB created by the first dislocation is negated by the second dislocation moving through . In addition to b1 = a/2〈110〉 dislocation pairs and APBs, stacking faults along 〈111〉 directions have also been observed. A stacking fault may be created by gliding of b2 = a/3〈112〉 or b3 = a/6〈112〉 () dislocations . The gliding of a b2 = a/3〈112〉 partial dislocation in the γ′ phase produces a super-lattice intrinsic stacking fault (SISF)  and the gliding of a b3 = a/6〈112〉 dislocation produces a complex stacking fault (CSF) . It is also obvious that b3 = b2 ± b1. In this regard, CSF can be considered of a compound planar defect of SISF and APB.	0
The energy states of the fore-mentioned three types of planar defects, i.e., energy barriers for the gliding of the three types of partial dislocations into the γ′ phase, have been estimated to follow the order of CSF > APB > SISF . Gliding of a b3 = a/6〈112〉 partial dislocation, which produces CSF, has the highest energy barrier, i.e., is the most difficult. However, when a b3 = a/6〈112〉 partial dislocation glides behind a b2 = a/3〈112〉 partial dislocation, it will transform the SISF region into an APB, thereby experiences a lower energy barrier compared with CSF alone . Such b2 + b3 partial dislocation pairs have been observed to operate at intermediate temperatures around 750 °C . Given that (energy barrier) APB > SISF, it can also be understood that shearing by a b1 = a/2〈110〉 dislocation, which produces APB, is more difficult than the shearing by a b2 = a/3〈112〉, which produces SISF. However, b1 = a/2〈110〉 dislocation pairs have been observed experimentally after creep testing at intermediate temperatures , and no clear explanation has been given in the literature.	0
Formation of stacking faults requires k〈112〉 partial dislocations (k is a constant expressing the magnitude of a specific dislocation), which are not native in the FCC crystal. Three different models have been proposed to explain the mechanisms for the creation of these dislocations. In the first model , the partial dislocations are created by dissociation of a/2[011] via a/2011→a/31¯12+a/6211¯. This reaction represents a free energy increase for the dislocations. Also, the Burgers vectors of the two partial dislocations created are not parallel, thus cannot explain the observation of partial dislocation pairs of like Burgers vectors . The second model  proposed a a/2011→a/61¯12+a/6121 reaction. As discussed above, the APB created by the shearing of a/2[011] has a lower energy state than the CSF created by the shearing of either of the two a/6〈112〉 partial dislocations. In this regard, the motivation (necessity) of the above dislocation decomposition appears to be unsupported. The third model  proposed a/2[101] + a/2[011] → a/3[112] + a/6[112] for the production of the 〈112〉 partial dislocations. This appears to be the only plausible mechanism. However, the situation where partial dislocation pairs of dislike Burgers vectors are formed is not covered in this case.	0
Given the obvious deficiencies and uncertainties concerning these models, we conducted this study to investigate the formation mechanisms of partial dislocation pairs and planar defects in the γ′ phase in a Ni-based single crystal superalloy under the condition of mechanical straining at intermediate temperatures (creep testing). In-situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) has been shown to be useful in observing dislocation activities during mechanical deformation . However, the fast mobility of dislocations can still make it difficult sometimes to observe and record dislocation reactions and to determine the Burgers vectors of dislocations. Thus, ex-situ TEM study was also used in this study.	0
The chemical composition of the Ni-based single crystal alloy used is given in . The single crystal was grown by directional investment casting method, and the growth direction is [001]. The single crystal sample was heat treated following a process including solution treatment at 1275 °C for 4 h (air cooling), aging at 1100 °C for 2 h (air cooling) and a second aging at 850 °C for 24 h (air cooling). Creep testing was performed at 750 °C under a tensile stress of 750 MPa along the [001] direction. After creep test, thin disc specimens perpendicular to the [001] loading direction were cut from the creep test samples for TEM examination. TEM specimens were prepared by twin-jet electrochemical polishing in an electrolyte of 5% perchloric acid and 95% ethanol at −30 °C. TEM examination was conducted using a JEOL-2010 transmission electron microscope operating at 200 kV.	1
 shows the creep curves of three samples tested at 750 °C under a tensile stress of 750 MPa. The testing of one sample was interrupted in the early stage of creep (stage I), the second sample in the intermediate steady state of creep (stage II), and the third sample was tested till rupture (stage III). The creep rate decreased gradually within the first ∼10 h and then remained nearly unchanged up to ∼1200 h before finally increased rapidly to rupture at ∼1450 h.	0
 shows TEM examination of the microstructures of the three specimens, revealing defect evolution during creep. The observing direction is [001], as confirmed by the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns shown in the inset in (a). The gray cuboidal blocks are the γ′ phase, and the light continuous phase is γ. These two phases arrange coherently along 〈100〉 directions. A few native dislocations can be seen along the γ/γ′ interfaces inside the γ phase. No dislocations were found inside the γ′ phase cuboids. (b) shows the microstructure after creep testing for 2 h. Many new dislocations appeared. The dislocations are mostly aligned along 〈110〉 directions. These dislocations are within the γ phase at near the γ/γ′ {100} interfaces.	0
(c) shows a micrograph of the alloy after 100 h of creep testing. The dislocation density has further increased. The majority of the dislocations are still in the γ phase, but many stacking faults in the γ′ phase (as indicated by the arrows) have been formed along the 〈110〉 directions, due to the penetration of partial dislocations into the γ′ domains. Most of the stacking faults extend through the whole domain of a γ′ phase cuboid. In addition to stacking faults, the γ′ phase also contained dislocation pairs along 〈100〉 directions, as indicated by the circle in (c), and the enlarged local view of it in (e).	0
(d) shows the microstructure of the alloy after creep testing for 1450 h. It is evident that the densities of both dislocations and stacking faults have increased significantly, apparently to accommodate the increased creep strain. Many dislocation pairs (marked by the ellipses) were also observed along 〈110〉 directions ((d) and (f)).	0
 shows TEM images of an APB (marked as 1 in (a)) and a stacking fault (marked as 2 in (a)) viewed from different directions in the specimen tested for 100 h. The Burgers vectors of the dislocations were determined by observing under different g directions. For the dislocation pairs of the APB, it is evident that they are visible when observed in g1 = [111] ( (a)) but extinct in g2 = [020] ( (c)) and g3 = [131] ((d)), thus the Burgers vector was determined to be b=a/2101¯. The two partial dislocations of the stacking fault are marked as “a” and “b”. They both are visible in [111] zone axis ((a)). Under g1=2¯20 two-beam direction ((b)), the interference fringes became invisible and the contrast of dislocation “a” became stronger than dislocation “b”. These observations imply that the Burgers vectors of the two partial dislocations satisfy g1·ba/bb=±1,±2, etc. and g1·ba>g1·bb. (c) shows the two-beam condition of g2 = 020, under which the fringes were visible again, but the two partial dislocations became extinct. This implies the conditions of g2·ba/bb=±1/3or±2/3. Based on the above conditions, the Burgers vectors are determined to be b=a/32¯11 for partial dislocation “a” and b=a/62¯11 for partial dislocation “b”.	0
It is evident in  that dislocations in the γ phase can propagate into the γ′ phase in the forms of dislocation pairs causing the formation of APBs and stacking faults. Stacking faults are formed in between b2 + b3 partial dislocation pairs. APBs are formed in between pairs of identical b1 = a/2〈110〉 dislocations.	0
Similar to the findings reported in the literature , the a/2〈110〉 dislocation pairs are found to distribute along 〈110〉 and 〈100〉 directions (line direction, not Burgers vector). For the 〈110〉 line dislocation pairs, they are found to locate on the closed packed {111} plane. The 〈100〉 line dislocation pairs are reported to be formed by cross-slip of two parallel dislocations from {111} to {001} and then move as a pair by gliding in {001}. The cross-slip is driven by the need to reduce APB energy because the APB energy on {001} is much lower than the APB energy on {111} . However, activation of this model may be impeded by three concerns.	0
Firstly, the 〈110〉 oriented dislocations cannot turn its orientation to 〈100〉 by cross slipping, because a cross-slip only changes the slip plane and the direction of movement of a dislocation but not its line orientation. Secondly, slipping of a b = a/2〈110〉 full dislocation on {001}, a non-slipping plane, requires high driving force. One possible way to realize a dislocation line rotation from 〈110〉 to 〈100〉 is via a combined effect of gliding in {111} and diagonal climbing in {001} . Obviously, this is a much more difficult process and often requires prolonged time at much higher temperatures to accomplish (e.g., 1100 °C for 3000 h ). Thirdly, the sliding of the dislocation on the {001} interface cannot produce APB. Only the sliding of a dislocation inside the γ′ phase can induce it. Therefore, it is reasonable to expect that the dislocation pairs seen in (b) are in fact 〈110〉 dislocation pairs as conventionally observed . The observed 〈100〉 line orientation of the dislocations is in fact 〈100〉 projections of the 〈110〉 dislocations in TEM observation.	0
Stacking faults are formed by the passing of partial dislocations, and partial dislocations always occur in pairs. To explain the formation of partial dislocations, three main models have been proposed in the literature. The first model  proposes that the k〈112〉 partial dislocations are formed by dissociation of b = a/2〈110〉 full dislocations, e.g., via	0
This reaction produces two non-parallel k〈112〉 partial dislocations with different Burgers vectors. One question of this model is the increase of lattice distortion energy associated with the dislocation reaction. The lattice distortion energy of a dislocation can be expressed as ∑(bbefore)2>∑(bafter)2. For the dislocation reaction expressed above, this implies that (2/2)2<(6/3)2+(6/6)2. This means that this dislocation reaction is not energetically permitted as a self-activated process, but possible under creep testing conditions. Also, the Burgers vectors of the two partial dislocations created are not parallel, thus the occurrence of partial dislocation pairs of like Burgers vectors must be due to other processes.	0
The second model  proposes the dislocation dissociation reaction, e.g., viaas the mechanism for the formation of a/6〈112〉 partial dislocations. Gliding of a/6〈112〉 into the γ′ phase produces CSF, which has a higher energy than APB. Therefore, it is energetically less favorable for b = a/2〈110〉 full dislocations to dissociate into b = a/6〈112〉 partial dislocation pairs than reaction  in order to glide into the γ′ phase.	0
The third model  suggests the following dislocation reactions for the production of k〈112〉 partial dislocations:	0
This model requires two a/2〈110〉 full dislocations as the reactants. It satisfies the energy reduction criterion for spontaneous dislocation reactions, given that 2×(22)2>(63)2+(66)2. Reaction  produces two parallel k〈112〉 partial dislocations and reaction  produces two non-parallel k〈112〉 partial dislocations. For the stacking fault observed in , which contains two parallel k〈112〉 partial dislocations, only this model appears to be the plausible mechanism for its generation.	0
To investigate the criteria of activation for the above two shearing processes, all different combinations of full and partial dislocations are examined, as presented in  (for the case of slipping on one (111) plane). The first column identifies the leading dislocation (dislocation 1). The second column indicates the planar defect produced after the passing of the leading dislocation. The rest of the table displays the tailing dislocations and the planar defect it produces, apparently from the planar defects created by the leading dislocation. The two “Reason” columns give the reason why a dislocation pair combination is prohibited (or the criterion violated by the dislocation pair). “OK” in these columns implies that the dislocation pair is permitted. There are five such criteria that dislocation pairs must not violate, as identified by I ∼ V in the table. The five criteria are:	0
Criterion I: The vector sum of the two dislocations in a 〈110〉 dislocation pair can always be expressed as xa21¯01+ya21¯10+za201¯1. Parameters x, y and z must all be integer numbers and they cannot be zero at the same time. Any two dislocations that do not conform to this criterion must not be from the same 〈110〉 dislocation pair.	0
Criterion II: A pair of two dislike (i.e., non-parallel Burgers vectors) a/2〈110〉 dislocations, e.g., a/21¯01+a/21¯10, produces APB1 + APB2. At the same time, dislocation pair a/32¯11+a/62¯11 have the same vector sum as above, but produces SISF + APB. It is known that the magnitude of energy follows SISF < APB. This implies that a dislike a/2〈110〉 dislocation pair is unstable and will always voluntarily transforms into a/32¯11+a/62¯11 like pairs.	0
Criterion III: Gliding of an a/6〈112〉 dislocation into the γ′ phase produces a CSF, which has a higher energy than an APB, which is produced by a, a/2〈110〉 full dislocations. Therefore, dislocation reaction a/2011→a/61¯12+a/6121 is energetically unfavorable.	0
Criterion IV: The vector sums of dislike a/3<112> dislocation pairs, i.e., a/32¯11+a/31¯21¯ and a/32¯11+a/31¯1¯2, are a〈110〉, which is effect a super-dislocation consisting of two identical a/2<110>. Such dislocation cannot form due to the excessive repulsive force between the two like dislocations with the same Burgers vector.	0
Criterion V: The a/3<112>+a/6<112> dislocation pair produces SISF + APB. In comparison, a/6<112>+a/3<112> dislocation pair produces CSF + APB. Given that SISF < CSF, only the former combination can operate.	0
Based on these criteria, the following can be concluded from the analysis presented in :	0
All combinations are prohibited or energetically unfavorable except two cases: a/21¯01+a/21¯01, and a/32¯11+a/62¯11 (or a/612¯1, a/6112¯). The former produces an APB by the leading dislocation and restores the perfect crystal by the tailing dislocation. The latter produces a SISF by the leading dislocation and converts it to an APB by the tailing dislocation.	0
CSF is not a favored choice with any dislocation pair combination. This is consistent with the analysis presented in . CSF is effectively a compound defect of SISF + APB.	0
 schematically shows the formation processes of a/2〈110〉 full dislocation pairs (APBs) and k〈112〉 partial dislocation pairs (stacking faults). (a) shows the case of two identical a/21¯01 dislocations in a (111) plane. Dislocation ① is on the (100) γ′/γ interface and dislocation ② is at a distance behind due to the repulsive force between them. The two dislocations may glide into the γ′ phase as a pair, as shown in (b). During this process, the passing of the leading dislocation produces an APB, which is eliminated by the passing of the following dislocation.	0
(c) shows a case of two parallel full dislocations with different Burgers vectors, with the leading dislocation being b1=a/21¯01 and the succeeding dislocation being b3=a/201¯1. Their Burgers vectors can be decomposed into edge (b⊥) and screw (b//) components, with the relationships of 2b(1)//=b(3)//, b(1)⊥≠0 and b(3)⊥=0. It is seen that there is a repulsive force between the screw components and no interactive force between the edge components of the two dislocations. Comparing with the repulsive force of the a/2〈110〉 dislocation pair shown in (b), the repulsive force here is one half of it. When the external stress is large enough, these two dislocations may be pushed close together to meet at the interface, thus to activate dislocation reaction  to produce two new partial dislocations with a/31¯1¯2 as the leader and a/61¯1¯2 as the follower. These two partial dislocations may glide in a pair into the γ′ phase, creating a stacking fault (SISF) in between and an APB behind, as illustrated in (d).	0
When the succeeding dislocation in (c) changes to a/2011¯, as shown in (e), the interaction between the leading and succeeding dislocations will also be changed. The relationships of the edge and screw components of their Burgers vectors follow 2b(1)//=−b(6)//, b(1)⊥≠0 and b(6)⊥=0. It is seen that there is an attractive force between the screw components and no interactive force between the edge components of the two dislocations. The attractive force pulls the two dislocations together at the γ′/γ interface, activating reaction  to produce two partial dislocations of a/32¯11 as the leader and a/6112¯ as the follower, as illustrated in (f). The passing of these pair of dislocations through the γ′ phase creates a SISF in between and an APB after.	0
In essence, each of the above two reactions () contains two steps. The two dislocations shown in either (d) or (f) need to first combine to become one dislocation before dissociating again into two k〈112〉 partial dislocations, i.e.,or	0
As shown in  and , APB can be formed by the passing of a single a/2〈110〉 dislocation or an a/3〈112〉 + a/6〈112〉 dislocation pair. It is also easy to understand that the passing of a second identical single a/2〈110〉 dislocation or a second a/3〈112〉 + a/6〈112〉 dislocation pairs will eliminate the APBs. This has been experimentally observed . On the other hand, the passing of a non-identical but co-planar a/2〈110〉 dislocation will convert the APB to a different variant () on the same plane. The same also applies to the case of a second a/3〈112〉 + a/6〈112〉 dislocation pair.	0
 shows a schematic of the elimination process of APBs produced by k〈112〉 dislocation pairs. (a) is the arrangement of three successive (111)γ′ planes forming an A-B-C stacking as in an L12 structure. The top, middle and bottom layers are represented using different sized cycles. The Ni and Al atoms are represented in blue and red colures, respectively. (b) is the image after the top (111) layer has been displaced in shear by b=a/31¯1¯2, as indicated by the black arrow. After this movement, the positions of the atoms in the top (111) layer have changed to align to the bottom (111) layer, thus a SISF is produced. (c) is the image after the top (111) layer has sheared by b=a/31¯1¯2+a/61¯1¯2, as indicated by the black arrows. This shear distortion produces an APB. (d) is the image after the top (111) layer has sheared by b=a/32¯11+a/6112¯, as indicated by the black arrows. This movement produces the same APB as that shown in (c). The green dashed arrows in (c) and (d) indicate the route by which the APB is eliminated by a repeating shear same to the original shear that produced the APB.	0
In addition, APB can also be eliminated by shearing of a a/21¯10 full dislocation, as indicated by the solid green arrow in (c) and (d). Considering that a dislocation can only be activated by a shear stress component along its Burgers vector, the dislocations with Burgers vectors of a/2110 and a/21¯10 will not be activated under a [001] external stress (as in the case of this study), thus the APBs shown in (c) and (d) are eliminated mainly by the repeated slip of the same type of a dislocation pair. This also indicates that reaction  is hardly activated because of the low mobility of a/21¯10 dislocations under a [001] external tensile stress.	0
In summary, this study presents a comprehensive examination of all possible dislocation pairs among m〈110〉 and n〈112〉 dislocations and their possible movement into the γ′ phase. This study clarified many uncertainties, many are caused by isolated and fragmented studies in the literature, regarding the criteria for the formation of the various dislocation pair combinations, the correlations between different dislocation pairs and the type of planar defects they generate, and the rules of annihilation of these defects. The specific conclusions may be presented as below:	0
The L12 structured γ′ phase is able to accommodate plastic deformation via dislocation movements. Given its ordered super-lattice structure, full dislocations in the disordered γ phase act as partial dislocations, thus they always move inside the γ′ phase in pairs. The passing of different dislocation pairs create stacking faults or anti-phase boundaries within the L12 structure of the γ′ phase.	0
APBs can be formed by the passing of one single a/2〈110〉 dislocation or an a/3〈112〉 + a/6〈112〉 dislocation pair. APBs can be eliminated by the passing of an identical single a/2〈110〉 dislocation or an identical dislocation pair as the original that has created the APB. Passing of a non-identical but co-planar a/2〈110〉 dislocation or a/3〈112〉 + a/6〈112〉 dislocation pair converts the APB to a different variant APB.	0
Stacking faults (SISF) are formed by the passing of an a/3〈112〉 partial dislocation, which always occurs as the leading dislocation in the a/3〈112〉 +a/6〈112〉 pair. The positions of the leading and tailing dislocations in this pair cannot be changed. This also implies that a SISF is always followed by an APB.	0
An a/3〈112〉 +a/6〈112〉 partial dislocation pair can be formed from two native a/2〈110〉 full dislocations in the γ phase, in two steps via an intermediate dislocation:	0
or	0
The development of in situ composites based on Nb solid solution (Nbss) and Nb3Si/Nb5Si3 silicides has been motivated by the demand for high-temperature structural applications beyond those of Ni-based superalloys [1,2]. Ti, beneficial to both the oxidation resistance and room temperature fracture toughness, is one of the major alloying elements for the Nb–Si alloys [2,3]. Recently, it has been found that as a substitute for Si in the α-Nb5(Si,B)3 phase (to be referred as T2 afterwards), B has a beneficial effect in enhancing the oxidation resistance and reducing the anisotropy ratio ac/aa of T2 in the Nb–Si alloys [4,5]. In order to improve the design of new engineering materials and understand the relationship between microstructure and properties, the knowledge of the phase equilibria of the Nb–Ti–Si–B quaternary system is prerequisite. Detail information on the phase equilibria at 1500°C in the Nb-rich region of the Nb–Ti–Si–B system has been reported elsewhere [6]. The objective of this study is to understand the effect of B addition on the liquid–solid phase equilibria in the Nb-rich Nb–Ti–Si–B alloys. This knowledge is essential to understand the microstructure and property of these Nb–Si alloys generated by liquid–solid processing techniques [7–9].	0
The strategy for establishing multicomponent phase equilibria in this study is experimental investigations coupled with thermodynamic modeling using the CALPHAD approach [10,11]. This work started with previously developed thermodynamic descriptions of the Nb–Si–B [12], Nb–Ti–Si [13], Nb–Ti–B [14] and Ti–Si–B [15] systems. Then, based on thermodynamic descriptions of the four constituent ternaries, Gibbs energy functions of the phases in the Nb–Ti–Si–B quaternary were obtained through the interpolation, and then isothermal section at 1500°C and liquidus projection of the quaternary were calculated from these functions. Next, seven alloy compositions were selected for experimental investigation. These selected alloys were fabricated by arc-melting and heat treated at 1500°C for 150h. Their as-cast and annealed microstructures were then characterized. Lastly, the experimental results obtained in this study were used to improve or validate the Gibbs energy functions obtained from extrapolation, until all experimental data can be satisfactorily reproduced by calculation.	0
Fig. 1 shows the three constituent ternary liquidus projection near the Nb corner, which will be explained in detail below.	0
The bottom face in Fig. 1 shows the calculated liquidus projection of the Nb–Si–B system by Sun et al. [12]. In the region with the Si and B concentrations up to 30at.%, there are six primary solidification phases: Nbss, Nb3Si, NbB, T1, T2 and D88. The notations of all phases are explained in Table 1. T2 extends its homogeneity range from α-Nb5Si3 into the Nb–Si–B ternary by substituting Si with B. D88 has a Mn5Si3-prototype hexagonal unit cell, and it is formed by small B atoms filling the interstitial sites. Five ternary invariant reactions on the liquidus projection were reported in the Nb-rich corner [12]: II1: L+NbB→Nbss+T2 at 1986.5°C; II2: L+T1→Nb3Si+T2 at 1963.2°C; II3: L+Nb3Si→Nbss+T2 at 1888.2°C; III1: L+NbB+D88→T2 at 2174.8°C; III2: L+T1+D88→T2 at 2160.1°C. In addition, two minimum points were proposed to occur on the L→Nbss+T2 and L+D88→T2 monovariant lines, respectively. The calculated reaction types and primary solidification regions in Nb-rich corner are in accordance with those proposed by Junior et al. [16].	0
Liang et al. initially assessed the Nb–Ti–Si ternary primarily by direct interpolation based on the descriptions of the constituent binary systems [17]. Yang remodeled this system by considering newly reported experimental data [13]. The calculations from Yang's thermodynamic description yielded good agreements with experimental observations. Recently, Geng et al. modified the thermodynamic description of the binary Nb–Si system based on David's assessment [18], and optimized the Nb–Ti–Si ternary system [19]. Geng's work is consistent with Yang's work in major features. To be consistent with the thermodynamic description of the Nb–Ti–Si–Cr–Hf multicomponent system developed in our research group, the assessment of Yang was accepted in the present work [13].	0
Fig. 1 (the back-right face) shows the calculated liquidus projection of the Nb–Ti–Si system by Yang [13]. Since α-Nb5Si3, β-Nb5Si3 and Ti5Si3 in the Nb–Ti–Si ternary have the same crystal structure as T2, T1 and D88 in the Nb–Si–B ternary, respectively, they were modeled as the same phases in the quaternary system, and the same notations of these phases as those in Nb–Si–B were adopted. Two Class-II invariant reactions (II4 and II5) and one Class-III invariant reaction (III3) exist in the Nb-rich region of the Nb–Ti–Si liquidus projection. The invariant reaction at II4 in Fig. 1 is L+T2→D88+(Nb,Ti)3Si. The calculated temperature and liquid composition of this reaction are 1615°C and Nb–55.6Ti–18.3Si, respectively. The invariant reaction at II5 in Fig. 1 is L+(Nb,Ti)3Si→Nbss+D88 with calculated temperature and composition being 1352°C and Nb–76.6Ti–14.5Si, respectively. All alloy compositions in this paper are in atomic percent unless otherwise stated. The calculated results agree well with the experimental measurements [20]. Symbol III3 in Fig. 1 denotes the invariant reaction L+T2+T1→(Nb,Ti)3Si with calculated temperature and composition being 1974°C and Nb–0.6Ti–20.4Si, respectively, which is very close to the peritectic reaction L+T1→Nb3Si in the Nb–Si binary. Yang also performed solidification simulation for alloys in this region [13]. The simulation results can well account for the experimentally observed as-cast microstructure.	0
Witusiewicz et al. and Nakama et al. performed separate thermodynamic assessment for the Nb–Ti–B ternary [21,22], and achieved reasonable agreements between the calculated and experimental results regarding 1400°C isothermal section, vertical sections of Ti99.5B0.5–Nb98B2 and Ti92.5B7.5–Nb92.5B7.5, liquidus projection and solidus projection. Nakama et al. also did first-principle calculations to estimate the formation enthalpy calculations of Nb3B2, NbB, TiB, Nb5B6, (Nb,Ti)3B4 and (Nb,Ti)B2 with the compositional range along the Nb–Ti direction [22].	0
Witusiewicz et al. and Pecanha et al. have developed the thermodynamic modeling of the Nb–B binary system and calculated similar phase diagrams in the Nb-rich corner in Nb–Ti–B system [21,23]. Pecanha et al. used the more reasonable (Nb,Va)1(B,Va)2 model to describe NbB2[23], while (Nb,B)1(B,Nb)2 was used in Witusiewicz et al.’s work [21]. The thermodynamic description modeled by Pecanha et al. was thus used in the modeling work of the Nb–Si–B system [12]. For the Ti–B system, thermodynamic descriptions have been reported by Batzner, Witusiewicz et al. and Nakama et al. [21,22,24]. The difference between their modeling works is about TiB2. Batzner treated TiB2 as a stoichiometric compound [24], while Witusiewicz et al. and Nakama et al. took into account the solubility range of 65.2–67.6at.% B for TiB2[21,22]. This difference about TiB2 has less effect on the phase equilibria in Nb-rich corner and the thermodynamic parameters of binary phases for Ti–B from Batzner have been taken in the Ti–Si–B system [15]. To construct a compatible thermodynamic description for the multi-component Nb–Si alloys, we developed the thermodynamic description of the Nb–Ti–B ternary [14], based on the thermodynamic parameters in Nb–B, Ti–B and Nb–Ti systems from Pecanha et al., Batzner and Kumar et al., respectively [23–25]. The thermodynamic descriptions from Witusiewicz et al. and Nakama et al. and our work agreed with each other and could reproduce the available experimental data of Nb–Ti–B [14,21,22].	0
In the region with the B concentration up to 30at.%, there is one Class II invariant reaction. This phase transition is L+NbB→Nbss+TiB, denoted by II6 in Fig. 1 (the back-left face). A eutectic line extends from L→Nbss+NbB in the Nb–B binary to L→Nbss+TiB in the Ti–B binary. The calculated liquid composition and temperature of this reaction are Nb–36.3Ti–16.8B and 1866°C, respectively. They are in reasonably good agreement with the estimated liquid composition Nb–39Ti–13B and the experimentally measured temperature 1790°C as such a high temperature reaction [26]. The developed thermodynamic description for Nb–Ti–B is considered reliable to provide a very useful basis for interpolation into the Nb–Ti–Si–B quaternary system.	0
Yang et al. developed the thermodynamic description of the Ti–Si–B system based on the available experimental data [15]. Since the Ti–Si–B ternary is far away from the Nb-rich region and has less effect on the liquidus surface in this region, it is not introduced here. A detailed description can be found in the original work [15].	0
Based on thermodynamic descriptions of the four constituent ternaries, Gibbs energy functions of phases in the Nb-rich Nb–Ti–Si–B were obtained through interpolation [12–15], and liquidus projection then can be calculated from these functions. The compositions of alloys were selected from the calculated liquidus projection for further experimental verification of the model.	0
Seven alloys were selected for experimental investigation. Table 2 lists the nominal composition of each alloy. All of the starting materials used in this work are high purity elements: 99.97% Nb foil, 99.95% Nb slugs, 99.995% Ti slugs, 99.9999% Si lumps and 99.5% B crystals. Button ingots, each about 6g, were prepared by non-consumable tungsten electrode arc melting in a water-cooled copper crucible in an ultrahigh purity argon atmosphere (99.998% Ar). Before arc melting, each component was accurately weighed and the Nb slugs, Ti slugs, Si lumps and B crystals were wrapped by the Nb foil to reduce the vaporization of Ti, Si and B at high temperatures. Each alloy was melted and flipped five times to promote complete mixing and melting. Only the ingots with a weight loss of less than 0.5wt.% were chosen for further investigations, and the actual compositions were considered very close to the nominal compositions. The microstructure analysis procedures for the as-cast samples are similar as for the annealed samples, which have been described in more detail previously [6].	1
Microstructure characterization results of these seven alloys suggested that solubilities of Nb3B2 and T2 are extensive. In the present work, the sublattice models of (Nb,Ti)3(B,Si)2 and (Nb,Ti)5(Si,B)3 are chosen for Nb3B2 and T2, respectively, to satisfactorily account for their homogeneity ranges in the quaternary space. Thermodynamic descriptions for the remaining phases were obtained through interpolation [12–15]. The thermodynamic modeling parameters obtained in this work were optimized by incorporating the experimental results from annealed samples, as shown in Table 3. All the phase diagram calculation and model parameter optimization were carried out in Pandat [27]. The comparison between the calculated phase equilibria at 1500°C and the experimental observation from annealed samples has been published elsewhere [6]. The experimental information from as-cast microstructure was not used for the optimization, but for comparison and verification with the calculated liquidus projection.	0
Microstructural characterization results from as-cast alloys, which provided much information on the liquid–solid phase equilibria, together with the calculated results, are now discussed and presented below.	0
As shown in Fig. 1, the primary solidification regions in the Nb-rich corner of the Nb–Ti–Si–B system are bounded by those phases from the constituent binaries and ternaries: Nbss, T2, T1, D88, (Nb,Ti)3Si, NbB and TiB. In the as-cast microstructure of investigated alloys, Nb3B2 phase was observed in addition to these phases. Nb3B2 is formed from the peritectoid reaction NbB+Nbss→Nb3B2 at 2072°C in the Nb–B binary [23], and there is no primary solidification regions of Nb3B2 in the constitute binaries and ternaries. This study suggests that Ti and Si additions increase the stability of Nb3B2, thus the primary region of Nb3B2 appears in the Nb–Ti–Si–B quaternary.	0
The liquid–solid phase equilibria of a ternary are normally visualized through a liquidus projection on the composition plane. In quaternary, the composition space is three-dimensional, as shown in Fig. 1. The visualization of liquidus projection in a three-dimensional space is difficult. Therefore, composition of one component will be fixed so that the liquidus projection could be visualized in a two-dimensional diagram. A two-dimensional (2D) section of liquidus projection consists of univariant lines of three-phase equilibria between liquid and other two solid phases [28]. It is useful not only for easy visualization but also for retaining important information about the multicomponent liquidus surface [28]. Fig. 2 shows the calculated 2D section of the Nb–Ti–Si–B liquidus projection with Si fixed at 16at.%. The lines in Fig. 2 are univariant lines of three-phase equilibria, and the areas are nine primary solidification regions: Nbss, T2, Nb3Si, Nb3B2, NbB, (Nb,Ti)B2, Ti3B4, TiB and D88. Besides these phases originated from constituent binary and ternaries, the primary Nb3B2 region is shown in this 2D section. The symbols denote the bulk compositions of the investigated alloys located in different primary phase regions. The calculated primary solidification regions for the investigated alloys are in good agreement with experimental observations. It is worth noting that the composition of liquid is varying during solidification process. Fig. 2 is a section of the liquidus surface with Si fixed at 16at.%, so the solidification path of an alloy cannot been visualized directly in Fig. 2.	0
Fig. 3(a) and (b) shows the calculated Nb–Ti–Si–B liquidus projections at 4at.% B and 7at.% B, respectively. As seen in Fig. 1 (the Nb–Ti–Si face), there is no direct eutectic reaction between Nbss and T2 in the Nb–Ti–Si ternary. However, with the addition of 4at.% B, direct eutectic solidification occurs between Nbss and T2 in the Nb-rich Nb–Ti–Si–B liquidus projection. The Nb3Si primary solidification region is greatly reduced. With more addition of B (i.e., 7at.%), the Nb3B2 primary solidification region comes in between Nbss and α-Nb5Si3(T2) and the Nb3Si primary phase region completely disappears in this 2D section of liquidus projection. These calculations suggest that the B additions destabilize Nb3Si primary solidification and stabilize Nb3B2 primary solidification.	0
Solidification paths substantially determine the final solidification microstructure and the subsequently annealed microstructures, and are essential for material design and processing. Two simple models, equilibrium solidification and Scheil solidification have been integrated into Pandat for calculating solidification paths [27]. The cooling speed of the chilled copper-mold cast in this study is rather fast, therefore, the experimental results from as-cast microstructure were compared with the Scheil-model predicted solidification paths. Details are given below.	0
The low mag. and high mag. BSE images of the as-cast microstructure of Alloy #1 (Nb–12Ti–16Si–16B) are shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b), respectively. The observed phases are dark gray NbB primary phase, large amount of a medium gray phase Nb3B2, and the eutectic-like microstructure of Nbss+T2. The simulated solidification path in Fig. 4(c) predicts the primary solidification phase as NbB, then the liquid composition transverses the peritectic ridge of L+NbB→Nb3B2, and gets into the primary solidification of Nb3B2, in which Nb3B2 forms until the liquid composition reaches the eutectic of L→Nb3B2+T2. After the solidification of T2, a variety of eutectic reactions L→Nbss+T2, L→Nbss+T2+Nb3Si, L→Nbss+Nb3Si+Nb3B2 and L→Nbss+Nb3Si+TiB were predicted in sequence. The calculated mole fraction of T2 in the L→Nb3B2+T2 eutectic and the L→T2 stage is 4.0% and 1.2% respectively, so neither the Nb3B2+T2 eutectic nor the primary T2 could be clearly observed in the as-cast microstructure due to their small amount. The predicted three ternary eutectic reactions L→Nbss+T2+Nb3Si, L→Nbss+Nb3Si+Nb3B2 and L→Nbss+Nb3Si+TiB have small mole fractions of 0.4%, 2.9% and 2.3%, respectively. The predicted terminal ternary eutectic reactions cannot be observed in the as-cast microstructure, which is probably due to their small amount or that the actual cooling conditions were different from the Scheil model so that the terminal reactions did not happen. It can be seen in Fig. 4, the experimentally observed phases are well predictable by the simulated Scheil solidification path.	0
The calculated results using Scheil model can give the element partitioning of the phase from beginning to the end. Table 4 lists the calculated element partitioning in Nb3B2 involving only the L→Nb3B2 solidification stage of Alloy #1. It can be concluded that the concentrations of Ti and Si in Nb3B2 increase during the primary solidification stage of L→Nb3B2. Based on EPMA measurements, the average composition of primary Nb3B2 was Nb–7.3Ti–16.5Si–24.8B. Considering the experimental uncertainty and the difference between the real situation and the assumptions in Scheil model, the calculated results can be considered to reproduce the experimental data reasonably.	0
Fig. 5(a) and (b) shows the low mag. and high mag. BSE images of Alloy #2 (Nb–23.5Ti–16Si–10B) respectively. The observed microstructure consists of primary gray Nb3B2 phase, a small amount of T2 on the edge of Nb3B2 and a fine interdendritic Nbss+T2 eutectic structure. The calculated solidification path of Alloy #2 in Fig. 5(c) starts with the Nb3B2 primary solidification, then the liquid composition reaches the eutectic of L→Nb3B2+T2. Then, a small amount of T2 is solidified, and the eutectic of Nbss+T2 was predicted. Finally a variety of ternary eutectics Nbss+T2+Nb3Si, Nbss+Nb3Si+Nb3B2, Nbss+Nb3Si+TiB and Nbss+TiB+D88 were solidified subsequently, with the calculated mole fractions of 0.2%, 16.7%, 13.3% and 1.1%, respectively. The predicted terminal ternary eutectic reactions cannot be observed in the as-cast microstructure again for the same reason as we discussed for Alloy #1. The observed microstructure in Figs. 5(a) and (b) is in reasonable agreement with the simulated solidification path in Fig. 5(c).	0
As compared in a similar way for Alloy #1 in Table 4, the calculated compositional range for primary Nb3B2 in Alloy #2 well accounted the EPMA determined results. Alloys #4, #5, #6 and #7 have similar microstructures as that of Alloy #2, and are all from Nb3B2 primary phase region. They are not discussed in detail here.	0
The low mag. and high mag. BSE images of the as-cast microstructure of Alloy #3 (Nb–20Ti–16Si–1.5B) are shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b), respectively. It consists of primary faceted Nb3Si phase, binary Nbss+Nb3Si and fine ternary Nbss+Nb3Si+T2 eutectic-like microstructures. In the ternary eutectic, the grey Nb3Si phase and dark grey T2 phase have the compositions of Nb–14.4Ti–23.9Si–1.9B and Nb–18.3Ti–30.8Si–6.3B, respectively, based on EPMA measurements. Fig. 6(c) shows the simulated solidification path of Alloy #3, the beginning stage of the simulated solidification path is the Nb3Si primary solidification, followed first by the Nbss+Nb3Si two phase eutectic and then L→Nbss+Nb3Si+T2, L→Nbss+Nb3Si+Nb3B2 and L→Nbss+Nb3Si+TiB ternary eutectic reactions. The last two predicted ternary eutectic reactions have small mole fractions of 8.9% and 7.5% respectively. Again, the observed microstructure is consistent with the simulated solidification path. The present study of simple solidification calculations simultaneously validates the reliability of the thermodynamic parameters of this quaternary system and can also give very useful guidance for manufacturing and processing.	0
As shown in Table 4, the calculated concentration of Ti in Nb3Si increased from the beginning to the end involving the primary L→Nb3Si solidification stage. Good agreement was achieved between the calculated and experimental determined compositions for primary Nb3Si in Alloy #3.	0
The liquid–solid phase equilibria in Nb-rich corner of the Nb–Ti–Si–B system have been proposed for the first time using the CALPHAD approach. Model parameters are required for Nb3B2 and T2 in the quaternary system, due to the rather strong quaternary interactions, while thermodynamic descriptions for the remaining phases were obtained from interpolation. The proposed liquidus surface of the Nb-rich Nb–Ti–Si–B system is associated with eight primary solidification regions: Nbss, T2, T1, D88, (Nb,Ti)3Si, NbB, TiB and Nb3B2. Nb3B2 was stabilized in the quaternary space due to the substitution elements of Ti and Si, while other phases were from constitute ternaries.	0
The calculated primary solidification regions in Nb-rich corner are in accordance with the observed phases presented in the as-cast microstructure of seven alloys. The comparisons between the observed phases presented in the as-cast microstructure of the seven alloys with those predicted from the Scheil simulation were performed and good agreements are achieved. This suggests that the topological features of the currently proposed liquidus surface in the Nb-rich region of the Nb–Ti–Si–B system are correct. The calculated phase diagram in this work can serve as a guide to design alloy compositions for future experimental study.	0
The authors would like to thank CompuTherm LLC for their support of using Pandat program, and Prof. Y.A. Chang (University of Wisconsin-Madison) for experimental support and discussion.	0
Low cycle fatigue and creep-fatigue behaviors are systematically explored.	0
Cracking modes and damage mechanisms under different loading waveforms are investigated.	0